Conducts both basic and applied research on
various aspects of Sandalwood improvement,
protection and sustained utilization
Planting stock improvement and propagation of
tissue culture plants
5. Administrative Division
This division deals with administration, accounts,
audit, vigilance, and establishment part of the SPV
for smooth functioning.

In the meantime, Economic Advisory Council to
the Prime Minister (EAC-PM) has constituted a
committee namely Sandalwood Development
Committee vide Official Memorandum No. EACPM/Sandalwood/2021 dated 3rd March 2021,
details of which are annexed;
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) shall serve as the
friend, philosopher and guide to the sandalwood
development sector covering the entire value chain.
i
Dr. Bibek, Debroy, Chairman,
Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EAC-PM)
ii Shri. Ratan P. Watal, Member Secretary
iii Secretary, or his nominee
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF& CC)
iv Secretary, or his nominee
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (MoA& FW)
v Secretary, or his nominee
Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha,
Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)
vi Secretary, Ministry of commerce or his nominee
vii Chief Executive Officer, National Medicinal Plants Board
viii Dr. M.P. Singh, Director/Dr Arun Kumar, Scientist-G,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology
ix Dr. Shyam Vishwanath, Director, Kerala Forest Research
Institute, Thrissur
x Dr. K.T. Parthiban, Dean, Forest College & Research Institute,
TNAU, Mettupalyam
xi Shri. Pradeep Kapoor, Jagat Aroma Oils Distillery, Kannauj
Shri. K. Rajeswara Rao, Sr. Adviser,
Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EAC-PM)
7
-Chairman
-Co-chairman
-Member
-Member
-Member
-Member
-Member
-Member
-Member
-Member
-Member
- Member Convener
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
The SDC may induct any other expert as its member.
Terms of Reference of SDC:
i To identify issues relating to sandalwood plantations and marketing in consolation with various State
Governments and agencies.
ii To examine the legal provision sand suggest amendments to increase Sandalwood Plantation and
marketing in different part of the country
iii To study the Australian model of Sandalwood Plantation and its marketing, including its bye products,
and suggest measures to adopt the same or any other better ways in India;
iv To study the domestic & International markets/trade for Sandalwood and its bye products and suggest
measures for promoting production and marketing to increase value addition and employment
domestically; and
v Any other matter relating to the development of Sandalwood in the country.
First meeting of the Sandalwood Development Committee was held in the month of April 2021 to get
different viewpoints of all stakeholders. However, due to covid-19 activities of the Sandalwood Development
Committee are delayed. Meanwhile it was thought to bring out a special issue on sandalwood in Wood is
Good magazine to update the present scenario of sandalwood cultivation in India.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
8
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Status and Scope of Indian Sandalwood
(Santalum album L.) in Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh and Punjab
Introduction
I
ndian Sandalwood or
simply Sandalwood
(Santalum album L.)- a
member of the family Santalaceae,
has great historical, mythological,
cultural, ecological, and economic
significance in India and is
popularly called Chandan,
Srigandha, and Chandnam (meaning
fragrant or wood for burning
incense). Owing to the possession
of one of the best pleasing scents of
the world, fine carving characters,
people’s great faith in relieving
stress and providing mental peace,
use of wood in Puja (worship),
Tilak, and many rituals in many
faiths- all these make Chandan/
sandalwood the costliest wood of
India. Therefore, it will not be
exaggerating to crown it as “Green
Treasure or Green Gold”. A small
tree attaining a height of about 10m,
it is native to the tropical belt of
peninsular India, eastern Indonesia
(islands of Timor and Sumba) and
Northern Australia (Orwa et al,
2010). The main distribution is in
the drier tropical regions of India
and the Indonesian islands of
Timor and Sumba. Outside India,
its natural distribution extends
from 30 degrees N to 40 degrees S;
from Indonesia to Juan Fernandez
Island (Chile) in the west and from
the Hawaiian archipelago in the
north to New Zealand in the south.
It is truly green gold and is the
second costliest wood in the world
Jagdish Chander,
Principal Chief Conservotor of Forests (HoFF),
Panchkula, Haryana.

after African Blackwood (Dalbergia melanoxylon). However, due to
illegal harvesting and overexploitation, mature trees are hard to find. So
much so that in many parts of India, economically viable trees (above 30
cm dbh) are commercially extinct (Arunkumar, et al, 2019). Further, the
monopoly of sandalwood trade by the Governments of Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu and Kerala and its consequences have resulted in severe
exploitation, pushing S. album into the ‘vulnerable’ category of the IUCN
Red List.
It has deep roots in the history and culture of India since time
immemorial and finds a special place in all the major religions of India.
The wood is used for worshipping the God Shiva, and it is believed to be
the abode of Goddess Lakshmi. It is considered a symbol of vitality and
is venerated in India because people of India believe that it emanates a
great spiritual radiance and it produces protective energies.
Sandalwood plays an important role in various religions. Chandan is
treated as an aid to meditation and spiritual devotion and to improve
mental clarity. Hindus support the Tikka (a coloured spot on the
forehead) of its paste on their forehead. Sandalwood paste is used in
many religious rituals and ceremonies in many religions. In Jainism,
sandalwood paste is mixed with saffron for Puja. In Buddhism,
sandalwood oil is used to produce incense for worship.
Sandalwood is reported to have antiseptic and anti-inflammatory
properties and is beneficial for use in minor skin irritations. It has also
been reported to have anti-cancer properties and is useful in heart
disease. Sandalwood is known to dissipate the effect of hot sun or fever,
satiate thirst and provide a cool but refreshing feeling. The wood paste is
useful in inflammation, treating boils, and applied on the forehead in
fever and on skin diseases. It is one of the finest woods to carve on and is
a favourite wood of carving artisans.
Chandan was introduced in North India at regular intervals but the
performance of its plantations in farmlands/agriculture fields in north
India was not good. However, in the jungle, it thrives very well in the
company of Lantana camara suppressing the latter to some extent and
freeing the land from the invasive problems of L. camara. However,
ecologists have started raising fingers on it owing to its spreading nature
in biodiversity rich areas. The birds aid in the dispersal of seeds. Tipu
Sultan, the then ruler of Mysore, declared it a royal tree in 1792 and it
9
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
became a protected tree in his empire. In Haryana,
Punjab, and Himachal Pradesh whether it is found in
the forests or outside forests, it is treated within the
framework of existing rules and regulations with no
extra restrictions are imposed.

The efforts continued to introduce it as an
ornamental plant as its presence itself is considered
a matter of pride in Haryana. Somehow, the forest
officers are not convinced with the past
performance of the species and, therefore, are not
very keen to cultivate this species, but then there
happened something which is now changing the
attitude of foresters of Haryana. It was in the year
2005 that fifty sandalwood saplings were planted in
Mallah Herbal Park near Pinjore in Panchkula
district of Haryana. This herbal park was established
in a jungle in Shiwalik foothills after cutting/
uprooting L.camara. However, the rootstocks of L.
camara remained. The planted saplings of
Sandalwood got a preferred host to attach its host to
the roots of L. camara. Almost all Chandan saplings
planted in this park survived.

The acceptance or the rejection of the species and
its genotypes in Karnataka, Tamilnadu, and Kerala is
done based on Santalol content. However, this is not
an issue in north India. If sufficient wood is available,
it can be converted into furniture, and the leftover
wood pieces, chips, and scrap can be used for
extracting oil which can be used in making soap,
cosmetics, and aromatherapy. The fine powder can
be used in incense sticks. There are no restrictions on
the growing of sandalwood, felling, and transporting
it in Haryana and Punjab if grown in the fields.
Having learned lessons from the success of
agroforestry in Haryana and Punjab as there are no
restrictions on farmlands, sandalwood cultivation at
least in Haryana and Punjab has great scope.

The planted seedlings started producing seed after
about seven years. The fruits were picked up by birds
and dispersed in adjoining L. camara infested jungle.
There was no human interference at all. The seeds
germinated and L. camara favoured sandalwood in
two ways – one by helping in meeting its nutritional
requirement and the other by nursing and protecting
the young seedlings from browsing by animals. In this
way, sandalwood has now occupied about two
hectares area. These observations are very important
from the management of sandalwood in the jungle and
on the farm. The lesson to be learned is that we cannot
follow clean cultivation in areas where sandalwood is
to be introduced for farming on the farmlands. In
forest areas, if we give little space to sandalwood, it
will slowly establish and grow even in L. camara
infested areas. For purely technical reasons it will not
be proper to introduce sandalwood in new forest
habitats keeping in view the biodiversity issues.
However, for managing L. camara infested areas, it will
be acceptable to introduce it. It will be a win-win
situation. On one hand, it will have some control on L.
camara, on the other hand, sandalwood will slowly
occupy the areas infested by L. camara. Further, the
latter will not be completely removed from the area
and, therefore, it will also satisfy those who say that L.
camara has become part of the habitat in India as it has
been staying in India for more than two hundred years
and protects soil, provides habitat to several
butterflies, birds like Red Jungle Fowl (Gallus gallus)
and Indian white eye (Zosterops palpebrosus).

Status in Haryana
The total geographical area of Haryana is 44,212
square kilometers. The state has four
biogeographical regions namely- Shiwalik in the
north, central plains, a semi-arid region in the west,
and Aravalli hills in the south. The maximum
altitude of Shiwalik in Haryana is 1492 m. There is no
written record of the first introduction of Chandan in
Haryana. However, it is believed that it was
introduced in Haryana about half a century ago.
Seedlings were planted in about half a hectare area.
The seedlings did not succeed. The reasons for the
failure were not recorded. The old generation of
Haryana foresters believes that Chandan cannot grow
in Haryana.
Being the most prized and sought after wood of
India, the efforts to grow Chandan as an ornamental
tree in homestead gardens continued but not with
much success. Hence, nobody thought of planting
Chandan for commercial purposes. In 1991 about 250
sandalwood saplings were planted in Chandi
Mandir Western Command Headquarters near
Panchkula by army officials for ornamental
purposes. The plants survived for a year or so and
later died probably for want of knowledge of the
requirement for growing sandalwood plants.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
10
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
As regards the management of sandalwood in the
area adjoining Mallah Herbal Park, the plants have
not attained exploitable diameter as yet. At present,
the area is small and trees are below the exploitable
diameter, the protection of the plants is not an issue.
Moreover, its presence in the forest area still goes
unnoticed. However, once it spreads further, the
protection issue is going to be there. For a win-win
situation in managing L. camara in the forest,
Haryana Forest Department is planning to allow its
spread. Elsewhere in the state, the people grow it as
an ornamental plant or in the botanical garden in the
parks. Only about one thousand sandalwood plants
are raised in Haryana Forest Department nurseries
every year mainly in Shiwalik forest divisions
namely-Morni Pinjore, Ambala and Yamunanagar.

two sandalwood plants in his courtyard and the
third one in the Jwalamukhi hills in the background
of the renowned Jwala Ji temple. The plants planted
in his courtyard did not survive but those planted in
the forest got good host in the form of L.camara. The
plants grew to maturity and flowering and fruiting
also took place. The birds started dispersing the seeds
and continue even today. At present, sandalwood is
found scattered in the Jwalamukhi forest and
adjoining private lands in about a 15 km radius of the
Jwala Ji shrine including farmers’ fields. It is spreading
in the jungle at the rate of about fifty meters per
annum. There is no legal ban on the cultivation of
sandalwood in H.P. and the interesting point is that
the species is growing on farmers’ fields/land too. The
forest department encourages farmers in H.P. in
general and in the Jwalamukhi area, in particular, to
grow sandalwood on their land owing to its very high
commercial value. Himachal Pradesh Forest
Department grows annually about 10,000 sandalwood
seedlings in its nurseries, about 80% of this in the
Dehra forest division under which the Jwalamukhi
area falls.

The neighbouring Punjab state is promoting
sandalwood cultivation on farmlands and the
farmers of Punjab are showing keen interest in its
cultivation and are planting it in their fields. In
Haryana too, the farmers are contacting the forest
department and asking for guidance. No commercial
plantations have yet come up in the state but
irrespective of the santalol content, the state will see
some commercial sandalwood plantations at least on
the absentee farmers’ fields. Marketing will not be an
issue as people would like to be the proud owners of
sandalwood furniture or carved articles. And in this
case, fragrant oil is not an issue.

Punjab Land Preservation Act, 1900 applies to the
whole of the state. However, that is a general act
applicable to all species and not to sandalwood alone.
Having no specific restrictions on cultivation,
harvesting, and transport of sandalwood in H.P., the
farmers either let it grow or plant it on their fields,
though mainly in the Jwalamukhi area. The sporadic
distribution of sandalwood has also been noticed
almost throughout the Dehra forest district in Kangra
district. The sporadic distribution in areas other than
the Jwalamukhi hill range is in addition to the
presence of sandalwood in a 15 km radius in the
Jwalamukhi hill range. Accordingly, sandalwood
occupied area needs scientific management.
However, the area finds no mention in the working
plan document of the Dehra forest division. Further,
possession of even one tree in Himachal Pradesh is
considered to be a matter of pride. There is no doubt
that the people of Himachal Pradesh like sandalwood
for economic and cultural reasons. As sandalwood is
growing successfully on its own in the Jwalamukhi
area, there is ample scope for extending its cultivation
in the entire Shiwalik region of the state especially in
Hamirpur, Bilaspur, Una, lower areas of Kangra,
lower areas of Solan and Sirmaur districts on farmers’
Status in Himachal Pradesh
Situated in the northwestern part of India,
Himachal Pradesh is a hilly state characterized by
extreme landscapes and peaks. The total
geographical area of the state is 55,673 km2 and the
altitude varies from 465 m to about 7000 m above
mean sea level. Sandalwood is not native to
Himachal Pradesh. and was introduced in Himachal
Pradesh owing to its very high economic value. It is
said that Shri. Sohan Lal Sood – a resident of
Jwalamukhi area, then Major in Indian army got
mesmerised with the species and carried with him
three seedlings of sandalwood from Karnataka and
returned to native place Jwalamukhi in Kangra
district of H.P. Jwala Ji temple is located at an altitude
of about 610 m and the Shiwalik hills in the
background of Jwala Ji temple are located at about
800 m above mean sea level. It is said that he planted
11
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
fields. There is not much information available on
its impact on the biodiversity of Shiwalik.
However, it can be safely said that it can play an
important role in the long-term management of L.
camara in Shiwalik. It is not an aggressive plant
species and is not likely to replace other species of
ecological and economic importance. It will,
therefore, be a win-win situation even in the forests,
let there be upliftment in the economic status of the
people.

of the state comprises low Shiwalik hills in the
north, fertile central plains, and semi-arid
southwest. There is no written record of the first
introduction of sandalwood in Punjab but it is
believed that it was introduced in the state during the
joint Punjab era or immediately after carving
Haryana out of Punjab. However, the past
introductions did not succeed. Thereafter,
sandalwood was introduced in Punjab Forest
Department’s Research Plot in Sanur in Patiala
district about 30 years ago. Thereafter, sandalwood
was planted on an area of about three hectares in the
Shiwalik hills of Hoshiarpur district in 2012. The
plantation both in a research plot in Sanour and
Shiwalik hills were successful. Sandalwood trees
grown in Sanour were analysed by the Institute of
Wood Science and Technology, Bangalore for
heartwood and essential oil content five years ago.
Sandalwood plants planted in Shiwalik hill forests
reached the reproductive stage in about 7-8 years and
now they are setting seeds. The seeds are being
dispersed by the birds and therefore, natural
regeneration is also taking place. At present,
sandalwood is found in forest areas of Talwara and
Dasuha in Hoshiarpur district and Shiwalik foothills
of Ropar district.

As in other parts of the country, the protection of
sandalwood in the forests as well as in the farmers’
fields is a big issue. The smuggling of the wood
does take place. That is why the presence of trees
having a commercially exploitable diameter in
forests or farmers’ fields is almost nil. However,
there is no report of the presence of organised
sandalwood smuggling mafia in Himachal
Pradesh.
The maximum girth recorded in the Jwalamukhi
jungle is 51cm. Analysis of the content of fragrant
oil in Himachal Pradesh sandalwood has not been
done. The formation of heartwood and sapwood
and their ratio has not been documented.
Heartwood formation is an issue, though it is not a
hindrance as regards the demand for its wood in
the region. Himachal Pradesh raises annually
about ten thousand seedlings in the low hills, about
60% of them in the Dehra forest division.
Irrespective of fragrant oil content and heartwood,
the possession of Chandan in Himachal Pradesh in
tree form or wood formation is considered as a
matter of pride. If sufficient wood is available, the
well-off people in the towns would like to go for its
furniture and the carved decorative pieces.

Punjab forest department has established
sandalwood nurseries in Talwara and Dasuya.
Annually, about seventy thousand sandalwood
plants are raised in these nurseries of Punjab forest
department-fifty thousand seedlings in Talwara
nursery, ten thousand in Dasuya nursery, and
another five thousand elsewhere in the state. Punjab
Government is promoting sandalwood cultivation in
Punjab and distributing sandalwood saplings in holy
shrines as “Prashad”. Sandalwood plants are also
sold @ Rs. 35 per plant within the state and @ Rs. 45
per plant for the residents of other states. A
demonstration plot adjacent to Talwara nursery has
also been established in Talwara. Some private
nurseries have also come up in Punjab and
Progressive Chandan Farmers Association (PFCA)
has also come up.

Besides L. camara, sandalwood is also using
Cassia fistula and Acacia catechu as its host as per the
field observation. The average girth is just close to
30 cm at breast height. Sporadically, sandalwood is
also found in Pragpur in Kangra district, Nadaun in
Hamirpur and some parts of Bilaspur districts
indicating that sandalwood is introduced in these
areas as well.

The farmers of Punjab have tremendous interest in
raising sandalwood purely for economic reasons.
Annually, 25,000 to 30,000 plants are provided to the
farmers in the state. There are about ten sandalwood
plantations in the state on the farmers’ fields. While
Status in Punjab
Punjab means land of five rivers. The total area of
Punjab is 50,362 square kilometers. The geography
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
12
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
some are planted in household premises, office
complexes for ornamental purposes, the others are
planted in the fields for commercial purposes. The
total area under sandalwood in the state on the
farmers’ fields is around twenty hectares. One good
plantation of 7-8 years old has been established at
Mattewara forest in Ludhiana by the forest
department. However, the plantations done by the
farmers are not more than 3-4 years. The plants
planted in the forest perform better than the
plantations in the fields. As regards the fragrant oil,
the oil content in Punjab Sandalwood was 2.29%
(Babita Mishra et al, 2018) as against a maximum of
4% in its natural home- Karnataka, Tamilnadu, and
Kerala. Most of the trees yielded 1.5 to 3% oil yield
(Sandeep et al, 2016). Oil content does not seem to be
an issue as the wood with less oil content will have an
immediate market for other uses like carving and
furniture. The long gestation period is an issue as it is
elsewhere in other parts of the country. If cultivated
on scientific lines, sandalwood has great scope for
enhancing the economic status of the farmers of
Punjab.

Conclusion
Being the most prestigious and costliest wood of India, Sandalwood (S. album) was, is, and will remain a sought
after wood in India and abroad. There is a big craze among the farmers of North India for cultivating sandalwood
in their fields. Santalol content which imparts fragrance to the wood does not seem to be an issue in North India. It
is a status symbol and the possession of sandalwood is alone considered a matter of great pride. Sandalwood tag
is sufficient for making one the proud owner of sandalwood even if the wood is not high in fragrant oil. The
possession of Chandan wood, therefore, is going to be a status symbol in north India if sufficient wood is available.
Accordingly, its wood will find an evergreen market in north India. People will love to be the proud owners of
sandalwood furniture and other items of interior decoration even if the fragrant oil content is low. However,
protection of the trees is a big issue even in north India as elsewhere in other Indian states. There is a mixed
response among the experts owing to the long gestation period of at least 25 years and the less heartwood
formation in north India. Keeping in view biodiversity reasons, it will not be hundred percent correct to
introduce sandalwood in new habitats but for managing L. camara infested forest areas, it will be a win-win
situation from all angles. Moreover, not being a non-sense species, it will never attain a status of invasive species.
As there are no restrictions on growing, felling, and transporting sandalwood in states like Haryana and Punjab
outside forests, its cultivation will flourish at least in these states on farmlands. Therefore, sandalwood
cultivation on scientific lines has a great scope in North India at least for the next one hundred years.

References
Arunkumar, A.N., Anurag Dhyani, and Geeta Joshi (2019). Santalum album IUCN Red List Assessment.
Babita Mishra, C. Sandeep, Sushant Arade, Sruthi Subbanna, Syam Viswanath (2018). Assessment of heartwood
and oil content of Santalum album Linn. In Natural and Naturalized populations across contrasting Edaphoclimatic conditions in India. Indian Forester. Volume 144, Issue 7, July. 018.
Dhanya, Bhaskar, Viswanath Syam and Purushothman Seema (2010). Sandal (Santalum album L.) conservation in
southern India: A review of policies and their impacts. Journal of Tropical Agriculture. 48 (1–2): 1–10.
Retrieved 12 June 2010.
J.K. Lu, D.P. Xu, L.H. Kang, X.H. He (2014). Tree Physiology, Volume 34, Issue 9, September 2014, Pages
1006–1017, https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/tpu073.
Kirtiman Awasthi (2007). Down to Earth. 15 July 2007.
Orwa, M. Santalum album L. Old.worldagroforestry.org. Agroforestry Database. Retrieved 4 April 2009.
Sandeep C, Raju Gogoi, Raijur Rehman, B. K. Boruah (2016). Variation in heartwood And Oil Content of Santalum
album L. in Assam and Karnataka. Journal of Bio resources 3(1):80-88 (2016).

13
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood – A Case for Private Enterprise
with Government Support:
A Scenario in Tamil Nadu
Mita Banerjee,
Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
Tamil Nadu Forest Department, Chennai.

S
andalwood is a much sought after species,
getting rarer and one of the few of the
costliest of these woods used in the world.
India has had a virtual monopoly over sandalwood
production though other countries including
Australia in more recent years have started growing
and trading in the species. Indian sandalwood has
held sway due to its superior quality.

drastically. Natural regeneration though is still good
in most of the areas.
In Coimbatore region of Tamil Nadu, sandalwood
is found in almost every type of soil such as on stony
red soil along the higher reaches of Moyar valley, on
alluvial soil along Hallurhalla, on rich loams in
Hulical, Kallar, Jacanare Reserve Forests and on
shallow gravelly soil on the Melur and Pillur slopes .
Javadi hills in Vellore District of Tamil Nadu, where
sandalwood occurs as an associate species, in its dry
semi evergreen forests is made up of charnokites and
leptynites.

History
Sandalwood has been a part of the Indian heritage
and culture from time immemorial and is also
integral to religious ceremonies. The Ramayana,
referring to the river Tambraparni (Tamara parni)
says “That river with its islands covered with fair
forests of sandalwood goes down the sea as a beloved
maid to her lover”. Recorded history on the
occurrence of sandal in India is at least 2300 years old.
Pali scriptures, Buddhist works and Kautilya’s Artha
Shastra are some of the ancient literature on which
sandalwood was referred to in some detail. In his
epic poem, Chilappathikaram (between 2nd and 5th
centuries A.D.) Ilango-Adikal, the Tamil Poet speaks
of sandalwood born in Southern Mountain (Malaya
Tenmalai piranda chandanam). These references
seem to indicate its being indigenous to the country.

Legal angle
As per the Tamil Nadu sandalwood possession
rules, 1970 no person shall possess on stock
sandalwood in excess of five kilograms without a
license. A stockist storing sandalwood and its byproducts should maintain a stock register showing
receipt issues and balance and submit a true extract
from the stock register for every financial year to the
District Forest Officer by the 10th of April, of the
following year. Movements of sandalwood should
be as per the Madras Sandalwood Transit Rules,
1967. Tamil Nadu Forests Act, 1882, was amended in
2002 to allow cultivation of sandalwood trees on
patta lands. The ownership of sandalwood trees
grown on private lands which was earlier with
government, now vests with the landowners but
extraction and sale is still in the hands of the
government i.e. after felling the sandalwood tree(s)
growing in patta lands or private areas, these shall be
sold only to Government. However at present
market rate as determined by the auction sale price is
payable to the patta sandalwood owner.

Distribution in Tamil Nadu
In Tamil Nadu, sandalwood trees are distributed
over an area of 3045 sq.kms mainly in Vellore
Thiruvannamalai, Tirupattur, i.e. the erstwhile
North Arcot (Javadis and Yelagiri Hills), Salem,
Erode, Coimbatore, Namakkal, Villupuram and
Dharmapuri districts and sparsely in Nilgiris,
Madurai and Trichy districts. Dense populations are
found in Chitteries, Javadis, parts of Shevaroys and
Tenmalai hills. Higher girth classes were common in
most of these populations earlier but the onslaught
from smugglers have decimated their numbers
The Tamil Nadu Sandalwood Trees Patta Land
15
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Rules, 2008 empowers the DFO to grant permission
to sell sandalwood trees to the Government, to
extract the same and transport the extracted trees to
the nearest "Final Cleaning Depot" under proper
permit. The DFO calculates and fixes the sale price of
the final cleaned wood based on the average sale
price of previous sale of sandalwood conducted in
that "Final Cleaning Depot" and 80% of the sale price
is the "net sale price" that will be paid to the owner of
the Sandalwood tree after deducting 10% as charges
towards extraction, transport and final cleaning and
another 10% for administrative charges. The owner
of the Sandalwood trees should be paid 20% of the
"net sale price" within 30 days of the extraction and
the balance within 90 days as per legal provisions. In
reality however it takes a lot of time to complete the
final cleaning process due to vacant posts and other
administrative reasons making it inconvenient for
the sandalwood owner sometimes.

unleashed for habitual offenders with reference to
sandalwood smugglers but to no avail.
Sandalwood production in the country has fallen
from about 4,000 tonnes per annum in the 1960s to
less than 1,000 tonnes during the 1990s. Earlier policy
involved extraction of dead and dry sandalwood
trees including roots up to 2.5 cm diameter from the
forests (the root contains high oil content). While
there have been years in the late 1980s when over
2000MT of sandalwood has been extracted in Trichy
and Sathyamangalam alone, at present barely a few
hundred metric tonnes are available collectively in
all sandalwood depots put together.
There is quite a catch 22 situation prevailing. Price
of sandalwood escalated as the species became more
and more difficult to obtain and laws governing its
trade kept tight, with its handling and trade mostly
left in the hands of the government. Expensiveness
drives the illegal trade through smuggling. The
scarcer it became, the higher was the price offered
and younger trees, even saplings with little or no
heartwood began to be felled and smuggled. The
price of Sandalwood in India has been increasing in
leaps and bounds with price of about Rs. 20,000 per
tonne in 1980, Rs. 2,00,000 per tonne in 1990; Rs.
40,00,000 per tonne in 2004 and 75,00,000 per tonne in
2014. The only solution can be flooding the market
with sandalwood which is possible if it is grown by as
many people and in as widespread an area as
possible.

To ensure transparency an online web portal was
created under ease of doing business. Applicant
needs to apply for the permission in the online web
portal www.forests.tn.gov.in/tree/ which also has
timelines fixed to avoid delay. Timeline for issuing
NOC is 37 days. At present there are about 40
applications for felling/extraction of sandalwood
received online besides those received offline
indicating its acceptance.

The depleting population of mature
sandalwood
India dominated the international sandalwood
market at one point of time. Almost all the S. album in
India is now consumed in the domestic market.
Export of timber from India is totally banned except
for handicraft pieces of sandalwood upto 50g weight.
FAO, 1984 noted that it is a priority species for in situ
conservation. Since then, sandalwood oil and
handicrafts have become more important. The Tamil
Nadu Handicrafts Development Corporation which
has been assisting artisans using sandalwood,
markets the products through the State owned
Poompuhar. However most artisans have shifted to
using other wood in the absence of enough
sandalwood and due to its prohibitive costs. This
makes a further case for growing the species in more
areas.

Sandalwood is one of the few most expensive
woods of the world, probably second only to the
African blackwood, mostly used for musical
instruments, others in competition with it being
pink/red ivory, Bocote, Ironwood/Lignum vitae (an
endangered species and the national tree of the
Bahamas which has been exploited to the brink of
extinction), agarwood used for essential oil, purple
heart, etc. International demand for sandalwood is
estimated to be 10,000 MT per year. USA and France
have been the two largest importers of Indian
sandalwood oil.
Given the demand both in the domestic and
international market, there has been rampant
smuggling of sandalwood in all the States bearing the
species. In Tamil Nadu the Goondas Act was
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
16
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
genetic stock of sandal from different States.
Sandalwood has over 150 host plants, some of the
good hosts being Casuarina equisetifolia, Acacia
nilotica, Pongamia pinnata, Melia dubia, Wrightia
tinctoria and Cassia siamea. Even grass is observed to
be good as a host for the species. In Tamil Nadu,
sandalwood has been grown with several species on
trial basis such as greens, lantana, pulses like Cajanus
cajan, etc. and even tissue culture tried.

Challenges
As for most tree crops, the long gestation period
for sandalwood is a factor discouraging its planting.
Protection though is the biggest challenge facing
conservation of sandalwood. Regeneration in the
species is copious in Tamil Nadu when conditions
are favourable. The tree starts flowering at an early
age of 2 to 3 years. Trees mostly flower twice a year
from March to May and September to December. But
the young growth falls prey to wild animals and
cattle grazing and browsing. Even if it escapes
grazing and browsing mere suspicion of heartwood
having developed gets the young trees felled by
smugglers scouting for the wood. There are very few
trees of girth over 30cm left in the natural forests.
Evenso, farmers have been growing the species on
their lands and good plantations over 15 years old are
seen in different districts in the State such as Salem,
Namakkal, Tiruchirapalli, Vellore, Coimbatore, etc.
Most of these are plantations raised without giving
publicity in the news or other media since that
attracts the attention of smugglers more easily
leading to the loss of atleast a few trees due to theft.
This is a welcome change from times when uprooted
of sandalwood saplings from their private land was
preferred by the people since protection of
sandalwood was a responsibility of the people by
law and failure or inability to do so was punishable
under law.

National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD) and other banks finance
projects for its commercial planting by farmers while
75% subsidy is provided by the National Medicinal
Plant Board which lists sandalwood as one of the
prioritized species for cultivation. Interest in
growing sandalwood in private areas is very high but
the legal implications that lock up profits from
harvest but more importantly fear of loss from theft
prevents many from attempting plantations of
sandalwood. The magnitude of risk can be assessed
from the fact that instances have been recorded of
illegal fellings even in offices or residences of senior
government officers of different departments.
Private growers of sandalwood are often faced with
instances of such theft leading to personal loss. Lack
of quality insurance against loss or damage for the
highly valuable wood is a big deterrent for
cultivators. Even so, various ingenuous methods are
being tried by enterprising farmers and others. Some
have formed groups so they can take turns in
watching out against thefts during the night. Many
opt for camouflage. For example planting is done
amidst bushes of weeds or thorny species. Once the
tree starts growing then it is covered with climbers
like pepper, etc. Barbed wire coiled around trees to
make use of saws difficult is also seen. The more wellto-do farmers have invested in costly systems of
protection both physical barriers and electronic
surveillance or other similar systems. For security,
modern techniques may be encouraged such as infrared intrusion alert systems, solar fence, RFID for
tracking and so on.

A related issue for safeguard of the valuable trees
is the contrast in laws. Sandalwood bearing States
have had very strong laws to prevent felling,
transport, possession etc. but on crossing the borders
the laws were not applicable. Thus godowns,
essential oil extraction units, etc. for sandalwood
sprang up in other States facilitating smugglers.
Government policy needs to be such that laws are
uniform across the country and protect the trees from
smugglers without hampering farmers from
growing and sale of the same.
Government has been interested in promoting
sandalwood plantations, reason why the stringent
laws in sandal bearing States like Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Kerala etc. was changed around early 2000s. A
lot of research has also been done by the research
wing of the Tamil Nadu forest department all
through over 100 years of its existence even under
British rule. Genepools have been created with
Providing subsidy for protective measures to at
least small and marginal farmers may encourage
them to opt for sandalwood. Insurance schemes
tailor-made for S. album can be encouraged. Sale to
government can also be made more attractive or
optional instead of compulsory as at present. Tamil
17
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Nadu has proposed for planting 60,000ha outside
forest areas mostly in farmers’ fields that are left
fallow. If the project viz Tamil Nadu Biodiversity and
Greening project comes through, it can give a big
impetus to native species especially sandalwood.

Since sandalwood comes up well in different soil
types as often found in fallow lands and requires
little attention, growing well in sunlight with frugal
watering, sandalwood can be a good option for
interested farmers.

Further reading:
Ananthapadmanabha H S (2000) Sandalwood and its marketing trend. My Forest 36: 147-151.

List of training programs offered by Institute of Wood Science and Technology
Sandalwood : Farming and Management of its Health
Course content : Basics of raising healthy nurseries and plantations of sandalwood with special focus on good silvicultural
practices for the best health of sandalwood, management of pest and disease of sandalwood with practical
demonstrations in field; economies, oil extraction and protection details
Course Director : Dr. R. Sundaraj
Contact
: 080-22190154, 9740433959, rsundararaj@icfre.org
Course Fee
: Rs. 9000/- (With boarding and lodging) + 18% GST; Rs. 6000/- (Without loding facility) + 18% GST
Extraction and Quality Assessment of Sandalwood and other Essential Oils
Course content : Basics of essential oil, extraction techniques of essential oil, quality assessment of essential oil, Value
addition of essential oil, practical demonstration of essential oil extraction an dtesting of essential oil for
quality control
Course Director : Dr. Rakesh Kumar
Contact
: 080-2210191, 9412973726, rakesh@icfre.org; 080 2290193, 9482594201
Course Fee
: Rs. 9000/- (With boarding and lodging) + 18% GST; Rs. 6000/- (Without loding facility) + 18% GST
Sandalwood: Seed handling, Nursery and Plantation Technology
Course content : Components of nursery; propagation techniques; composting; concept of root trainers based seedling
production; seed technology; supplementary nutrition; bio-fertilizers; pest management in nursery and
quality assessment of seedlings (includes one day field tour an dhalf day field visit to KSDL)
Course Director : Dr. B.N. Diwakar and Dr. N. Ravi
Contact
: 080-2210191, 9483252839, bndiwakar@icfre.org; 080 2290155, 9435524070,nravi@icfre.org
Course Fee
: Rs. 15,000/- (With boarding and lodging) + 18% GST; Rs. 10,000/- (Without loding facility) + 18% GST
Sandalwood: Tissue Culture Techniques
Course content : Modes of propagation through tissue culture; Media preparation; Explant collection; Surface sterilization and
inoculation; Shoot multiplication and rooting; Potting mixture preparation and hardening in mist chamber
Course Director : Ms. Tresa Hamalton
Contact
: 080-22190137, 93604731665, tresa@icfre.org; 080 2290155, 9435524070,nravi@icfre.org
Course Fee
: Rs. 9,000/- (With boarding and lodging) + 18% GST; Rs. 6,000/- (Without loding facility) + 18% GST
INSTITUTE OF WOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education)
An Autonomous Body of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of India
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru – 560 003, India Website: http://iwst.icfre.gov.in/awwtc/awwtc.htm
Ph: 080-22190148, 150 dir_iwst@icfre.org
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
18
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Status and occurrence of Sandalwood
in Andhra Pradesh
Chiranjiv Chaudhary,
Principle Chief Conservator of Forests,
Forest Department, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh.

T
he distribution of natural sandalwood in
forest areas of Andhra Pradesh forests is very
scanty and dispersed. Natural sandalwood
population is found mostly in Forest Divisions which
are contiguous to sandalwood areas neighboring State
of Karnataka namely Chittoor West Division and
Ananthapuramu Division. Further, due to scattered
nature of sandalwood trees in natural forests, state has
not followed/ recommended any specific management
practice in the Working Plans. In addition, due to its
scattered nature and immature status the calculation of
growing stock is difficult. Most of the crop falls in the
category of saplings except for few poles. Regeneration
is seen to be moderate to low. There were attempts to
raise Sandalwood plantations in the RFs however the
results were not encouraging due to poor success rate of
such plantations.

working plans) and to enhance value of growing
stock based on the past experience is given in Table 1.
In addition to the Ananthapuramu Forest
Division, natural population of Sandalwood is also
reported from Chittoor West Forest Divisionin
Pedduru, Naniyala and Narayanapuram beats.
There were attempts to raise Sandalwood
plantations in the RFs (Reserve Forests) however it
was not successful.
Recently, many farmers have raised sandalwood
plantation in their farm lands, as raising sandalwood
plantations generate additional income to the farmers.
Progressive farmers/ agri entrepreneurs and
enthusiasts have raised Sandalwood plantations mostly
as inter crop and sometimes as bund/ boundary
plantation as well. The details of Sandalwood
plantations in Andhra Pradesh are as follows:-
Presence of natural sandalwood regeneration is
reported from Kadiri, Penukonda, Bukkapatnam
and Ananthapuramu ranges of
Table 2: Details of Sandalwood Plantations in Andhra Pradesh (in ha.)
Ananthapuramu Forest Division and
Division
Area
Area
Remarks
district . The sandalwood found is in S. Circle
No
under
under
sapling and pole stages. The average
Sandalwood Sandalwood
age of the Sandalwood population is
Plantations Plantations
within RF outside RF
10 to15 years.

Blocks and Compartments:The Range wise Natural
Regeneration of Sandalwood found
in Ananthapuramu Division as per
random sample enumeration (As per
Table 1. Statement showing the
extent of area under Sandalwood
based on enumeration in
Anantapuram forest division
S. Name of the Range
No.
1
2
3
4
Anantapuramu
Bukkapatnam
Kadiri
Penukonda
1
2
Ananthapur
Ananthapur
Chittoor
(West)
0
70
20.63
141.4
3
WLM Circle
Tirupati
Circle Total
Chittoor
(East)
Rajampet
Tirupati
70
0
162.03
0
0
0
0
60
Circle Total
0
60
Grand Total
70
222.03
4
5
Rishi Valley School
raised Sandalwood
wood plantations
in 350 acres
TTD area
Sandalwood Depot:
Area
(in ha.)

The Government Sandalwood Central Depot,
Chittoor is the only depot for stocking and sale of
sandalwood in the state of Andhra Pradesh. The
quantity of seized and confiscated sandalwood
received from all the Divisions in the State is stocked
in the central depot for centralized sale through
auction. The available sandalwood stock in the
central depot as on date is about 1105 kg.

1520
1800
655
1768
5743
19
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Logjams in conservation vis-a-vis protection
of Sandalwood- scenario in Kerala
D. Jayaprasad, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
and J.R.Ani, Assistant Conservator of Forests,
Kerala Forest Department, Thiruvananthapuram.

S
andalwood is one of the most economically
important tree species occupying a preeminent position in Indian forestry. The tree
has been synonymous with ancientIndian culture
and there are many a references on its importance
and medicinal value in the age-old writings and
Indian epics.

gradually tapers off towards the tip of the stem.
While there are several species in genus Santalum,
Indian sandalwood is prized for being the most
potent, with 90% content of the active ingredient
santalol. Nearly 85% of the supply of Indian
sandalwood comes from the southern states of
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Annual
production has fallen from a high of 4,000 tonnes in
the early 1970s to less than 300 tonnes today.

Cynosure of commercial wood industry
Sandalwood is often cited as one of the most
expensive woods in the world because of its oil
content. Both the wood and oil produce a distinctive
fragrance that has been highly valued for centuries.
Consequently, all sandalwood bearing forests in the
country have suffered large scale illicit felling and
over harvesting in the past. India has already
imposed an export ban on Sandalwood and initiated
conservation measures to protect the species.

Distribution of Sandalwood in Kerala:
Sandalwood is naturally occurring in 11 forest
divisions of Kerala (Table 1). About 40% of total
sandalwood area found in Kerala is located in Marayoor
forest division. Sandalwood stand located in Marayoor
forest division serve as one of the major source of seed
for the propagation of sandalwood in India.

In sandalwood tree the oil content is highest in the
root, next highest in the stem at ground level, and
Table 1: Distribution of sandalwood in various forest divisions of Kerala
Sl. No.

Forest Divisions
Area (Ha.)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Marayoor
Mannarkkad
Munnar WL
Wayanad South
Thenmala
Chalakudy
Nenmara
Parambikulam
Kasargod
Periyar East
Wayanad North
Total
1460.77
878.16
353.27
185.00
224.00
125.00
149.50
114.00
162.00
9.00
10.00
3670.70
Major threats for sandalwood
No. of
Sandalwood trees
57751
51197
6638
4122
3293
2430
1483
1397
918
858
152
130239
the forest as well as private holdings. Natural and
anthropogenic factors can be attributed to the
depletion of sandal wood resources. Limiting factors
to natural regeneration of sandalwood in forests
include recurrent annual fires, lopping of trees,
The production of sandalwood in India is
decreasing annually at the rate of 20 percent since
1995. This decline in sandalwood production is
mainly due to the depletion of sandalwood trees in
21
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
spread of stem borers, proliferation of weeds and
introduction of mono culture plantations like
eucalyptus that have altered the ecology of natural
sandalwood ecosystems. There isan urgent need to
grow and conserve this important species not only in
forest habitat but also in areas outside forests.
Realizing the sharp decline in the sandalwood
population in the state of Kerala, and the State
Government has formulated speciallegal provisions
and policies to protect and conserve it.

areas were fenced with chain link and patrolling
was intensified by engaging staff and forest
watchers engaged round the clock with
improvement of logistics and communication
techniques. These interventions have successfully
brought down the illicit felling of Sandalwood in
Marayoor to a level of about one tree per month
subsequently. Under the JICA funded Ecorestoration project through Attappadi Hills Area
Development Society (AHADS), sandalwood trees
were significantly regenerated in Mannarkkad
Division which now has more than 51000 trees,
almost matching the number of trees in the Marayoor
Sandalwood Divisionper se. Experience in
Attappadi is a standing testimony to the fact that
with proper protection measures, Sandalwood can
be augmented in many places in Kerala where it is
naturally present.

Though the effective intensive protection
measures in the last decade helped tobring down
illicit felling of sandalwood to a considerable extent,
the sandalwoodareas are always under threat of
exploitation. Therefore, the protection strategies
evolved over time needs to be continuously
improvised and strengthened. The tree naturally
comes up in the forests coming under 11 Forest
Divisions in Kerala. However, due to the intense
illegal felling in the past, naturally occurring
Sandalwood trees in Kerala are now mostly confined
to Marayoor Forest Division. During the beginning
of the century, illicit felling of Sandalwood in
Marayoor had reached a whopping number of 2660
per year. Hence a separate division i.e., Marayoor
Sandalwood Division was carved out of Munnar
Division in the year 2005. The sandalwood bearing
Effective protection measures for the sandalwood
trees are done in Marayoor by providing chain link
fencing, construction of permanent camp sheds,
engaging sufficient protection mazdoors, engaging
dog squad etc. With all the efforts put in, illicit felling
of sandalwood trees could be considerably reduced
and similar sandalwood protection measures are
contemplated in other forest divisions of Kerala.

Further readings:
Hansda, R. (2009).The outlook for non-woodforest products in Asia and the Pacific. In: Asia-Pacific Forestry
Sector Outlook Study II Working Paper Series. p. 89.
Ananthapadmanabha,H.S.(2000). Sandalwood and its marketing trend. My Forest 36:147–152.
Dhanya,B., Syam Viswanath and Seema Purushothman(2010). Sandal(Santalum album L.) conservation in
southern India: A review of policies and their impacts. Journal of Tropical Agriculture 48(1-2): 1-10, 2010.
Rai,S.N.(1990).Status and cultivation of Sandal in India. In:Proc.Symposium on Sandalwood in the Pacific.
Hamilton, L. and Conrad, C.E.(eds). USDA Forest Service Gen.Tech.Rep. PSW-122, Honolulu, pp 66–71.
Arunkumar, A.N., Dhyani, A. and Joshi, G. (2019). Santalum album. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
2019: e.T31852A2807668.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
22
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Status of Sandalwood in the
State of Maharashtra
Pravin Chavan1 and Dinesh Sing2,
Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
2
Assistant Conservator of Forest,
Maharashtra Forest Department, Nagpur.
1
enabled the field officers to exercise strict control on
exploitation of this species and movement of any
produce of this species. This ban was however,
relaxed in the State on 12.05.2017 upon its recovery in
private areas and as also to convey the message of
‘Grow more’ to the general public.
Reduced availability has increased the value – for
wood and oil in the national and international
market and this could act as a fillip for bringing larger
area under sandalwood tree plantations. Natural
occurrence of ‘Chandan’ in Maharashtra is limited to
the dry regions of Western Maharashtra and its
occurrence in forest areas is negligible and only
about 600 hectares of area is known to have Chandan
trees in forests in Yavatmal and Amravati Circles.
However, plantation by agriculturists have been
carried out in the districts of Ahmednagar, Nashik,
Pune, Jalna, Latur, Solapur, Dhule and Jalgaon. The
success of these plantations is yet to be ascertained as
plants are yet to attain maturity. Areas in Vidarbha
region of the State has also seen successful
plantations of Chandan and results therefrom are
also awaited since exploitation is yet to be carried
out. Exploitation of such plantations are presently
subject to the rules laid down by the State
Government which are being liberalised to
encourage participation of private people in large
scale. Large scale participation, in every likelihood is
bound to create greater availability in future along
with greater awareness. Channelising this
availability to proper market for such private
planters would aid in boosting the confidence for
such an initiative to be successful.

I
n antiquity the Indian sub-continent was
known to be the source and exporter of mainly
luxury goods such as gold, gems, spices, fine
textiles, perfumes, sandalwood and ivory.
Sandalwood oil from Santalum album is widely used
in the cosmetic industry and is expensive. This has
led to many species of plants of genus Santalum
being traded under the term 'sandalwood'. Within
the genus Santalum alone there are many species that
are labelled as sandalwood. Trading of oil from
closely related species such as Santalum spicatum or
Santalum austrocaledonicum as sandalwood oil is also
noticed. On many occasions traders do not truly
know where the oil has come from as species from
different plant families are also called 'sandalwood'.
Other species that may be traded include oil from
Amyris balsamifera, Osyris lanceolata, etc. However, it
is the oil of Santalum album that takes the pride of
being traded at premium.
Presently, economically viable trees (>30 cm girth
at breast height) are very few. The species is also
threatened by 'spike disease' which leads to mortality
of trees due to changes in the physiology of the
species. Minor threats in form of decline in habitat
quality from over grazing and fire has also put the
species at risk.

The State Government had enacted the
‘Maharashtra Felling of Trees (Regulation) Act, 1964’
for preservation of certain species and preventing
soil erosion. The trees scheduled in this Act were
accorded specific protection and could not be felled
without the permission of the designated ‘Tree
Officer’. The powers of ‘Tree Officer’ were vested
The extent of risk was so high that the
Maharashtra State Government had to put a
complete ban on felling of Santalum album trees in the
whole State from 31.03.2008 onwards. This ban
23
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
with the Collector of the District. For silvicultural
management of the trees scheduled herein, powers of
‘Tree Officer’ were vested with the Forest
Department’s Range Forest Officer in the year
1989.The species Santalum album was included in the
scheduled list of this Act on 15th May, 1973 to control
unabated exploitation of the existing stock of
Chandan trees in private areas. However, threat over
Chandan persisted. The large scale theft has resulted
in seizure in large quantities by the enforcement
agencies which include the enforcement personnel of
the Forests and the Police Departments. No legal
exploitation from the ‘forests’ have been carried out
in near past however, the department has a stock of
more than 75 MT of sandalwood and about 200 litres
of sandalwood oil and bulk of this is stuck in subjudice matters. Besides this about 18 MT of
sandalwood was provided to the Karnataka Soap
and Detergent Factory, Bengaluru as advised by the
Central Government vide its advisory dated
19.05.2005 and revenue of more than 107 lakhs has
been remitted to the State Government.

hassle free harvesting and marketing of
Sandalwood and its products which would also
support in its better utilisation and conservation.
However, establishment of any wood-based
industry dependent upon sandalwood, being
covered under the Central Government’s ‘WoodBased Industries (Establishment and Regulation)
Guidelines, 2016’, shall be subject to regulations
stated in the State Rules. This regulatory mechanism
shall prevent overexploitation and smuggling of this
species and products derived therefrom.
With the huge demand for its wood and oil in the
national and international market, in the last decade,
extensive private plantations are now being
established across the State which, in a way, shall
pave the way for reviving the past glory of
sandalwood in India. Some of the measures needed
for its conservation and sustained utilisation could
be listed as follows:
 Establishing regional level seedling/clonal seed
orchard of superior genotypes for obtaining
quality seedlings and seed material.

The earlier policy of largely laying restrictions to
control illicit felling and its trade was relooked into
with advent of the National Forest Policy, 1988 and
further discussions thereon. The Central Government,
in its Guidelines brought out on18.11.2014, had sought
to encourage private participation for increasing the
area under tree cover to attain the stated target of
having 33% tree cover in the country. Accordingly, in
view of the vanishing population of sandalwood tree,
State Government has relaxed the earlier stringent
policies on sandalwood cultivation and harvest.
Santalum album was delisted from the schedule of the
‘Maharashtra Felling of Trees (Regulation) Act, 1964’
on 23rd March, 2021 to further encourage sandalwood
cultivation by the farmers and entrepreneurs.

 Proper assessment of its tree population at the
State and National level for equitable
management to profit the concerned agriculturist
and the entrepreneur.
 Encouraging mass production of seedlings and
distribution within the country so that
sandalwood cultivation is extensively
encouraged.
 Developing proper package and practises for
sandalwood cultivation that would enable in
bringing financial gains to the farmers which can
also help in conservation of the population.
 Role of genetics and environmental influences on
the heartwood and oil quality needs to be
extensively studied.

The Central Government, through MoEF&CC, has
brought out the ‘Wood-Based Industries
(Establishment and Regulation) Guidelines, 2016’ in
compliance of the order dated 05.10.2015 passed by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Writ Petition 202 of
1995 wherein all States and Union Territories have
been directed to suitably amend the State rules since
the Acts and Rules relating to ‘forest’ are under the
ambit of the respective State or Union Territory. This
shall enable in providing uniform rules and
regulations across the country that shall encourage
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
24
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Natural Distribution and Cultivation Status of
Sandalwood Trees (Santalum album) in Gujarat State, India
A. P. Singh,
Addl. PCCF, (Monitoring & Evaluation),
Gujarat Forest Department, Gandhinagar.

D
istribution in Gujarat: Sandalwood
trees are naturally well distributed in
Saurashtra, North, Central and parts of
South Gujarat regions and frequently occurring in
and outside forest area including Gir & Girnar
Forests of Junagadh, Banaskantha, Sabarkantha,
Gandhinagar, Kheda, Panchmahal, Dahod,
Narmada, Bharuch, Surat, etc., districts and river
banks of Sabarmati, Banas and Mahi. The Kachchh &
Valsad and Dangs District of South Gujarat region
are not suitable for its natural growth due to soil pH
and rainfall. This tree grows in the different zones of
Gujarat in the pH range of 6 to 7.5, rain fall from 750
to 2000 mm and temperature 15 to 40°C.

wood based industries. Considering the future
financial benefits of growing sandalwood, farmers
have started cultivation of Sandalwood from last 10
years. They purchase quality seedlings from private
and forest department’s nurseries. Gujarat Forest
Department provide all technical know how and
subsidy under Agroforestry and Vrukshkheti
schemes. The farmers of Gujarat have formed a
registered national body named 'ChandanVikas
Association'. As per the Association information
around 1500 farmers of Gujarat are associated and
cultivating Sandalwood trees in around 3000ha. of
land. The Sandalwood cultivation is carried out in
whole Gujarat except in Dangs district. As per the
information of Social Forestry wing of Gujarat Forest
Department, 674 farmers raised 330543 Sandalwood
trees under Agroforestry and Vrukshkheti schemes
(Table.1).

Sandalwood Cultivation: Farmers of Gujarat are
very progressive and innovative and are always in
search of new models of business. Farmers
successfully grow large scale plantations of clonal
Nilgiri (Eucalytus hybrid), Malabar Neem (Melia dubia),
Ardusa (Ailanthus excelsa), Desi Babul (Acacia nilotica),
etc. in different parts of Gujarat to cater the need of
Table.1: District wise list of beneficiaries who have grown Sandalwood
trees under Agroforestry and Vrukshkheti schemes in Gujarat.
Sr. District
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Ahmedabad
Kheda
Surendranagar
Anand
Kachchh
Patan
Bharuch
Surat
Tapi
Navsari
Valsad
Narmada
Mehsana
Banaskantha
Sabarkantha
Arvalli
No. of
No. of
Beneficiaries Trees raised
4
6
16
18
1
13
22
16
4
12
6
1
76
3
67
57
Sr. District
No.

1305
10440
6815
10270
1000
7240
16123
24706
1965
303
431
800
25542
3450
26023
11774
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
25
No. of
No. of
Beneficiaries Trees raised
Panchamahal
Mahisagar
Dahod
Vadodara
Chottaudepur
Junagadh
GirSomnath
DevbhumiDwarka
Jamnagar
Porbandar
Botad
Bhavnagar
Amreli
Rajkot
Morbi
Gandhinagar
Total
6
9
35
4
7
6
6
13
60
2
1
74
46
49
23
11
674
1844
3384
4815
4080
3365
2841
2783
7390
24004
812
350
32170
35750
37611
17087
4070
330543
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Case study of Protection of Sandal from
Ayurvedic Garden: The Government Ayurvedic
Garden, Gandhinagar was developed in 1980 in 12
hectares of area by the Gujarat Forest Department.
In the year 1982, this Garden was handed over to the
Director, Indian System of Medicine and
Homeopathy, Department of Health and Family
Welfare. Presently, this Garden is looked after by the
Gujarat Medicinal Plants Board (GMPB). As per the
recent enumeration there are 2414 Sandalwood trees
existing out of which 2056 trees are of less than 30 cm.
of girth, 328 trees in 30-60 cm. girth class, 25 trees in
60-90 cm. girth class and 5 trees over 90 cm. of girth
and all these trees are facing problem of theft. From
the year 2005 onwards around 60 mature trees were
repeatedly cut down illicitly by the trained gangs of
Rajasthan. The Sandalwood trees in the Garden are
being protected by the trained policing manpower in
three shifts and around Rs.19 lakhs are spent
annually. The auctioning of illicitly cut Sandalwood
was carried out by the GMPB. From three auctions
from 2015 to 2020, a total of 13586.49 kg of wood was
sold with an average price of Rs.1039 per kg.

FellingRegulation: Sandalwood tree together
with Teak (Tectona grandis), Kher (Acacia catechu),
Sisam(Dalbergia sissoo) and Mahua(Madhuca
longifolia) trees or their after growth, is the right of
Government and these trees have been reserved
under the provisions of the Bombay Land Revenue
Code, 1879, or rules made thereunder. These trees
either naturally grown or cultivated on private lands,
their ownership remained with state Government.
The state Government has authorized the Forest
Department and Deputy Conservator of Forest to
grant permission for felling of sandalwood trees in
his area of jurisdiction as per existing guidelines. The
transit pass is issued by the Forest Department under
the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
Case Study of Sandal Cultivation and its theft:
The biggest challenge is to protect naturally and
cultivated trees of more than 15 years of age and
about 45 cm of girth from the thieves involved in
illicit felling. For instance, two farmers namely Shri
Dahyabhai Patel and Shri Khemabhai Patel of Laloda
Village, Idar Taluka in Sabarkhantha District have
cultivated 700 Sandal trees each in the year 2007.
They procured quality seedlings @ Rs.50/- from the
private nursery and planted at the spacing of 6x6
meters in one hectare each with Neem seedlings
(Azadirachta indica) as the host plants. The author
supported them in getting subsidy from National
Medicinal Plants Board, New Delhi. Both the farmers
worked very hard and grew Sandalwood trees for
the first time in this area successfully. In the year 2017
i.e. after 10 years of age, these trees attained average
girth of25-30cm. and about 5 meters of height. These
trees started developing fragrance and heartwood.
However, even after taking all protection measures,
90 trees of Shri Dahyabhai Patel and 110 trees of Shri
Khemabhai Patel were cut down illicitly from the
year 2017 to 2020. Ultimately, during the year 2021,
Shri Dahyabhai Patel opted for the disposal and got
the permission from Forest Department. He
harvested 95 trees of 31-39 cm. girth at breast height
and 2-3 meter of merchantable height and produced
546 kg. of firewood and 1.365 cmt. of timber. The
firewood and timber was sold to an Agency of
Kannauj, Uttar Pradesh on lump sum amount of Rs.7
lakhs. Shri Khemabhai Patel is also in process of
getting permission to dispose the remaining
Sandalwood trees.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Suggestions for Future Prospects:The protection
of naturally grown and cultivated mature trees is
very challenging. Therefore, promotion of large scale
Sandalwood plantations might reduce pressure on
naturally grown sandalwood trees, as supply of
sandalwood in market increases from plantation
grown sandalwood. The farmers are also facing
problem in getting felling permission and transit
pass from Forest Department due to existing
restrictions imposed by the state forest department
and hence, the cultivated Sandal wood required to
be exempted from these regulations. After
harvesting, marketing is another challenge for the
sandalwood growers, hence, the ban on export need
to be lifted and proper marketing network needs to
be established to encourage the famers to raise
sandalwood plantations under agroforestry
schemes. Sandalwood being high value tree species,
Government of India and State Governments should
start centrally sponsored /state sponsored schemes
for its conservation and large scale cultivation.
Acknowledgement: Author is thankful to Addl.
PCCF Social Forestry, CCF Working Plan (Surat) and
Member Secretary, GMPB for providing requisite
information on cultivation of Sandalwood trees
under various schemes for writing this article.
26
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Need for a State Sandalwood Policy in
Karnataka – A new vision
*Prabhash Chandra Ray and #Saswati Mishra,
*Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
Forest resource Management, Karnataka Forest department
#
Chief Conservator of Forests, Forest resource Management,
Aranya Bhawan, Bengaluru.

K
arnataka known as ‘Srigandha Nadu’
because of largest extent of sandalwood
bearing forests in the country and the
fragrance of the sandalwood grown in the State.
Because of its very high demand and consequent
challenges encountered in its protection, the State
monopolised its cultivation, felling, conversion and
trade through strict provisions vide Chapter X of the
Karnataka Forest Act 1963 (Section 23 to 87), which
after amendment in 2001 bestowed legal ownership
of sandalwood trees grown on private land on the
land owner. Earlier, the Act had stipulated that
sandalwood trees are the exclusive property of the
Government. Further, the penalty for offence related
to Sandalwood was raised to 10 years of
imprisonment and the amount of fine was enhanced
upto Rs. One lakh (section 86). Section 87 stipulates
license for possession, storage and sale of
sandalwood or for processing it for oil etc.

heartwood and remaining 12 classes are for woods,
chips, mixed heartwood, white wood, saw dust or
powder (Rule 95). Rule 96 and 97 deals with supply
of Sandalwood to Government Sandalwood oil
factories and to temples and Muzrai institutions
respectively.

1.1
Existing schemes to promote
Sandalwood cultivation in Forest land and
Private Land:
To augment the resource base, sandalwood has been
promoted through
a) Siri Chanada Vana: a state sector scheme launched
since 2013-14 to cover an area of 5000 ha. of natural
sandalwood bearing forests. It also aims to cover
3500 ha. of degraded forests with sandalwood
plantations as well as to maintain older sandalwood
plantations, as sandalwood estates. Protection
activities such as chain link fencing, dog squads,
watch and ward etc are provided under the scheme.

Rules 103 to 123 of Karnataka Forest Rules 1969,
Chapter XIII deals with powers of forest officers to grant
permission to extract mature sandalwood trees, after
due verification of ownership and title of sandalwood
trees on private Land. Rule 108 as amended in 2001,
allowed owners may get extracted sandalwood to be
transported to the Government Sandalwood Depot for
disposal. It also provides for Depot officer to receive
sandalwood and convert it, as per its classification and
dispose by auction and retails sell.

b) Krishi Aranya Protshah Yojana (KAPY): for
providing seedlings at subsidized rates and for
providing incentive on survival of plants @ Rs. 125
over 3 years. Through the scheme is primarily meant
to promote Agro-forestry, which includes
sandalwood as well. Farmers in Kolar,
Chikkaballapura and few other dry districts are
showing tremendous interest for planting
sandalwood trees in their land.

Rule 118 provides for application for grant or
renewal of License for possession, storage and sale.
Further, Government of Karnataka order notification
dated 11-07-2008 under 100 (1) Karnataka Forest Rule
1969 notified Karnataka Soaps Detergents Limited
(KSDL) and Karnataka State Handicrafts
Development Corporation (KSHDC) as Public Sector
Undertakings permitted to purchase sandalwood
from the Owner at prices negotiated by them.

c) Raising of seedlings for public distributions:
Provides subsidizes seedlings to growers, including
farmers who do not register or those who are not
eligible under KAPY.

Provisions of Section 77 to 84 of the Karnataka Forest
Code, 1976 gives the procedure for exploitation of
Sandalwood. Rules 95-97 of Karnataka Forest
Manual 1976 provides for classification of
Sandalwood into 18 classes. The first 6 are for
d) Horticulture department supports sandalwood
cultivation by farmers under National Ayush
Mission and Nurseries under NAM as well as
National Horticulture Mission.

27
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
1.2 Issues to be addressed to enhance the
availability of sandalwood
system.
E. Trade: Presently, the trade of Sandalwood is
either with the Forest Department through the
three Government Sandalwood Depots or KSDL or
KSHDC Karnataka State to whom it is permitted in
2002.

There is huge gap in supply of quality sandalwood
compared to its demand. Therefore, there is huge
requirement to increase resource base of sandalwood
by encouraging its cultivation by farmers through
various policy interventions.

F. Conversion: There is a felt need for capacity
building and use of latest machineries for faster and
precise conversion of Sandalwood into various
classes. It is also being discussed to allow conversion
at cluster level through trained private individuals.

A. supply of Quality planting material from
known superior population and standardizing
package of practices with respect to treatment of
seeds, preparation of beds, transplanting with
suitable host plants, providing shade initially etc.

G. Classification: Presently, Sandalwood
classification is in Persian language and into several
classes. It is discussed that Sandalwood could be
classified based on the purpose of its usage i.e.,
different classification could be for bonafide,
handicraft or industrial purposes into not more than
8-10 classes.

B. Protection from smuggling of mature
sandalwood (with heartwood) is a huge challenge for
both the Government as well as Private growers. Use
of chain link fencing/CCTV/Dog squad is practiced
for protection. There is requirement of developing
newer solutions using innovation and technology,
because farmers are requesting felling of even 12-15
years old sandalwood trees in their land, as they are
fearing smuggling of trees from that age, as well as
threat to their life.

VISION: The policy on sandalwood is aimed to
encourage and promote the private stakeholders along the
value chain of sandalwood production from cultivation of
sandalwood tree to extraction and its trade. The policy also
envisions restoration and rejuvenation of the sandalwood
populations in the natural sandalwood bearing forests of
Karnataka.

C. Credit mechanism from National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and
other commercial Banks and insurance instruments
for the sandalwood plantations are also being
proposed to be developed to help commercial
cultivation of sandalwood plantations as well as for
its risk mitigation.

2.1 Policy interventions to promote
cultivation of Sandalwood
The following policy interventions are therefore
suggested to increase the availability of quality
planting material:
D. Felling Restriction: Presently, after receipt of
application for felling, Forest Department after
physical verification and after obtaining revenue
opinion about ownership of the land and trees,
accord felling permissions. After felling, the material
is inspected and then permit issued for transit to
either Government Sandalwood Depot for
conversion and disposal or to Karnataka Soap &
Detergent Limited or Karnataka Handicrafts
Development Corporation Limited based on the
choice of the grower.

a. Production of Improved Planting stock
A special program is proposed to be implemented
for production of Improved Planting stock covering
various aspects including (a) selection of Plus trees,
(b) identification of seed stands, (c) scientific
collection, processing, storage of seeds from
identified plus trees and seed stands, (d)
establishment of clonal seed orchards, (e) progeny
trials, (f) creation of database of Plus trees and geotagging these trees, (g) creation of GIS database of all
Plus trees, and (h) promotion of tissue culture. The
primary outcome of the program will be
augmentation of availability of improved seeds from
known and improved genetic sources from within
There are some delays in the process, despite ICT
application rolled out for the felling and its storage
under Seva Sindhu portal of Karnataka Government.
Farmers are, therefore, demanding exemption from
felling regulations; the pros and cons of which are
being considered for simplification of the procedure
and for processing the application through an online
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
and outside Karnataka.

28
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
b. Promoting Sandalwood seedlings in Forest
Nurseries:
is therefore proposed to have a unified portal to
provide information about innovative cultivation
models, intercropping patterns to optimize
economic gain, economics of raising Sandalwood,
site suitability criteria, success stories in the form of
case studies, short videos, involving various aspects of
planting, harvesting, conversion etc., The interested
growers will be required to register for training by
IWST/Forest Department and field visits to successful
plantations in private / forest land, among others.

To scale up the availability of Sandalwood
seedlings to farmers and to increase the extent of
Sandalwood plantations in forest areas, the
convergence opportunities under various programs
shall be coordinated. Additionally, it is proposed that
Sandalwood seedlings may be mandatorily raised at
a certain percentage of seedlings raised under
existing schemes, particularly in Sandalwood
bearing areas.

Sandalwood Growers – Corporate Joint Venture
c. Promotion of Sandalwood in Private Nurseries:
The sandalwood growers would be encouraged to
have joint venture with corporates to enable sharing of
ownership of sandalwood plantations, returns, risks
and other shared interest, where corporate may come
forward to fund the projects, provide technological
inputs, surveillance equipments and have joint
protection measure with the grower, carry out
extraction and sale of sandalwood or make annual
payment to the grower, who in return makes available
his land, nurtures trees, may cultivate other crops and
receive annuity from the corporate or receive share of
Sandalwood sale proceeds.

The Department of Horticulture has been
supporting Sandalwood cultivation under National
Ayush Mission. National Horticulture Mission
provides subsidy for establishment of quality
nurseries. National Medicinal Plant Board also
promotes Sandalwood cultivation. Convergence
with various existing programs/schemes of various
departments/ institutions will be coordinated to
grow Sandalwood seedlings in recognized private
nurseries as well.

Sandalwood cluster development
2.2 Intervention for Improving Protection of
Sandalwood trees
In order to promote cultivation of sandalwood trees
and to realize its benefits, in high potential areas
growers in a cluster would be encouraged to come
together and organize in the form of Sandalwood
Growers Co-operative Society or even producers
company for the purpose of shared interest related to
all aspects of sandalwood cultivation including
accessing credit, ensuring common protection, its
harvesting, conversion and trade etc.

Identification and protection of Sandalwood
Plantations, Sandalwood estates in forest areas and
providing them with chain-link fencing supported
by solar fences, adequate manpower, vehicles, dog
squad, arms and ammunition etc. Accordingly,
either the existing Sandalwood cultivation scheme
(Siri ChandanVana scheme) shall be strengthened /
redesigned with higher allocation of funds or a new
scheme will be formulated and implemented for
achieving above objectives.

2.4 Proposed policy intervention in
extraction, transportation and trade of
sandalwood.

2.3 Proposed policy intervention for private
land owners/ farmers
a. Process of felling and transportation.
In continuation of amendment of 2001, further
simplification and liberalization of the process of
felling, transportation, conversion and trade and
storage license would be brought to help growers in
cutting the present delay encountered through an
online portal to be developed by the department.

The proposed policy aims to facilitate translating
the high market value of sandalwood into
commensurate remunerative profits for sandalwood
growers through:
Innovative cultivation models
The growers may not be sufficiently aware about
plantation technique and on farm protocols to be
followed for optimizing the heartwood formation. It
b. Sale of sandalwood handicrafts by artisans
through e-marketing would also be encouraged.

29
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
c. Trade relaxation: Present policy of permitting
growers to sell the sandalwood trees to Government
Sandalwood depots or Karnataka Soaps and
Detergents Limited / Karnataka Handicrafts
Development Corporation Limited only, would be
relaxed to allow sale to other entities through online
portal registered with the Department.

growing, managing and marketing of sandalwood
and its produce to meet requirement of all
stakeholders.

d. Application for Geographical Indication (GI) for
Sandalwood grown in identified districts of
Karnataka would be facilitated to enable growers to
have distinct identity and to fetch better prices within
and outside country.

3.2 Constitution of Monitoring Committee
headed by Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
(Head of Forest Force) and including heads of
department of Horticulture, Agriculture, Commerce
& Industries, Ayush, KSDL, KSHDL and to be
convened by head of Forest Resource Management
wing of the Department to review and monitor on the
implementation of the policy, as well as provide
guidance and support to all concerned stake holders.

3. Proposed institutional Framework
4. Way Forward
The Policy is being proposed for next 30 years,
with a provision of comprehensive review every 5
years to assess its impact in realizing the vision and
objectives of the policy and based on which suitable
changes in policy framework and required
interventions can be brought.

3.1 Setting up of a Sandalwood Board or Council
A State Level body viz. Karnataka Sandalwood
Board/Council is proposed to be set up to oversee all
issues related to sandalwood cultivation by private
growers, other than regulatory functions being dealt
by the department. The Board / Council will have
panel of institutions and technical experts of
With compliments from
SIPMA
The South Indian Plywood Manufacturers
#1, 5th Main Road, Industrial Estate, Yadavagiri, Mysuru-570020
Email Id: sipmaindia@gmail.com
Registered on 19.03.1948
Representing Industries From
KARNATAKA / KERALA / TAMIL NADU /
ANDHRA PRADESH
TELANGANA AND MAHARASHTRA
WORKING FOR THE CAUSE OF THE INDUSTRIES SINCE 1948
President
Y. ABDULLA JAVEED
M/s. Indian Wood &
Wood Products
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Vice President
Dr. PRASHANTH
M/s. A K Ventures Pvt. Ltd.

30
Vice President
A. L. PATEL
M/s/ Geetha Plyboard
Pvt. Ltd.

Hon. Secretary
AMIR ABBAS VAGH
M/s. The Decorative
Laminates Pvt. Ltd.

Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Ltd., for the
support of Sandalwood from the Century and more...
Mahesh B. Shirur,
MD, Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Ltd.
Bengaluru.

S
andalwood oil is known for cure against
venereal diseases for which it was used during
early 20th century, till the arrival of Sulfadrugs
in 1930’s.During the 1st World War, the shipment of
Sandalwood to distillers in Germany was affected
leading to piling up of Sandalwood stocks in Mysore
State. So, it was felt by the Government at that time to
establish Sandalwood Distillation facility in the State.
As the technology for distillation was not available
locally at that point of time, help was sought from the
scientists working at Indian Institute of Science (IISC)
namely Dr. Watson & Dr. Sudbrough to come up
with the methods to obtain Sandalwood oil of
Pharmacopoeia grade acceptable to European
buyers.

famous Mysore Sandal soap using Sandalwood Oil
as base. The birth of Mysore Sandal Soap took place
in 1918.

During those days, Mysore state was under the
rule of His Highness Sri. Nalwadi Krishnaraja
Mysore sandalwood is reputed all over the world
for its quality and fragrance. The Mysore sandal soap
is manufactured by the Karnataka Soaps and
Detergents Ltd., (KS&DL) Company, which utilizes
the original sandalwood oils. Sandalwood has a
therapeutic effect on skin problems and is endowed
with antiseptic properties. The essence of the Mysore
sandal soap has also aided the company in gaining
popularity in the soap market. The company
produces various products of sandalwood.
Increased use of sandalwood has led to the tree being
endangered from extinction. The tree has been
declared as the protected species leading to the rise in
the prices of the rare Sandalwood.

Legal aspect of cultivation of Sandalwood:
Wodeyar and Sir. M. Visvesvaraya was working as
Dewan in Wodeyar’s court. Industrialization of the
state was one of the major priority of Mysore
Wodeyars. In this endeavour, establishment of soap
factory to manufacture soap, a daily necessity was
conceived. Sri. S. G. Sastry a young scientist was
deputed to UK for higher training in oil technology.
After returning from UK, trials were conducted not
only to manufacture soaps but also the creation of
Sandalwood plants are widely distributed in the
southern states like Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh and Kerala. The legal hassles faced by the
Sandalwood trade regulation are that there is no
comprehensive regulation applicable to the entire
country. As per the Karnataka Forest Act
(Amended), the grower himself is the owner.
Further, Govt. of Karnataka made amendment on the
31
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
sale of Sandalwood through Forest Department and
Government Departments to eliminate the
clandestine trade and to encourage farmers to take
up cultivation of Sandalwood on commercial scale
during the recent years. The Government of
Karnataka vide Notification No. FEE 21 FSW 2008
dt.11.07.2008 notified KSDL and Karnataka State
Handicrafts Development Corporation as the Nodal
Agency to buy Sandalwood directly from the
Growers. As per the Notification, the Public Sector
Undertakings/Defence Departments/Para Military
Organizations on whose land Sandalwood is
cultivated or has grown naturally are treated as
‘Owner’ as per Rule 103 (C) of1 Karnataka Forest
Rules 1969 (2002 amendment).

variousclasses of Sandalwood and revises price from
time to time for various classes of Sandalwoodbased
on the average price of auction sales of Sandalwood.
The Company has extended the administrative price
to the growers as and when the Company has
directly sourced the Rough Sandalwood since 2008.
So far KSDL has harvested morethan150 MT’sof
Rough Sandalwood from the Growers/Institutions
directly and released the payment in most
transparent method as per the price fixed by the
Company. Since the Company is finding difficulty in
getting sufficient quantity of sandalwood, it is
making all out effort to source the sandalwood from
all available sources like buying directly from the
growers as well through Auction sales conducted by
the State Forest Departments. At present,Company is
procuring dressed Sandalwood through e-auction
sales from Marayoor (Kerala), Shimoga, Mysuru and
Dharwad.

As per the amended rules, the Farmers/Growers
can approach our Company for harvesting the
Grown-up Sandalwood Trees. Once harvesting, the
rough sandalwood is allowed for natural drying for
about 3 months. To maintain transparency in
processing, the dressing of rough Sandalwood
and classification of sandalwood will be done
in presence of the ‘Owner”. Hence, the
‘Owners’ of Sandalwood trees shows much
interest in selling the Sandalwood to KSDL.
Our Company will also give every kind of
support to the Growers for harvesting the
grownup Sandalwood for mutual benefit of
both the organization and growers with the
permission of Forest Department. Further, the
Government vide Official Memorandum
No.A6.SDL.GL-5184/04-05/08-09
dt.16.07.2008 has fixed administrative price for
Dressed Root class of Sandalwood
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
32
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Role of KSDL in “Grow More Sandalwood”
Programme
entrepreneurs by giving scientific & marketing
support from time to time on Indian Sandalwood
Industry and the Global scenario.

KSDL works in partnership with sandalwood growers
on a ‘Share & Prosper’ basis in scientific and
commercial cultivation of sandalwood for the benefit
of both Growers and the Company. KSDL is having
MoU with many farmers for ensuring buyback
arrangements for Sandalwood on commercial
plantation spread over more than 3000 Acres in the
state. So far more than 500 farmers of the state have
entered into Bi-partite agreement with the Company
for commercial cultivation of Sandalwood and equal
number of farmers/growers have shown keen interest
for growing Sandalwood trees. Further, several
hundreds of Farmers have availed consultancy
services for commercial cultivation of
Sandalwood.This momentum has been growing
steadily in the state of Karnataka and even spreading
to the neighbouring states.

 Our vision is to produce the best quality natural
Sandalwood and Oil from the legal and ethical
sources on sustainable basis towards National
Prosperity through commercial cultivation of
natural Sandalwood to produce the best quality
natural Sandalwood oil-based products like soaps,
cosmetics, beauty aids, perfumes through
continuous revolutionize innovations for both new
and existing product lines to meet the global
standards.
 KSDL business of business is for more than
business: business is more transparent, sustainable,
legal & ethical by means of care, nurture & earn.
 KSDL basic philosophy is to Share & Prosper
together with sandalwood growers.
 Effectively working on sustainable, ecologically
sound & ethical supply of Sandalwood in a socially
responsible manner.
 KSDL Research centre’s constant endeavour is
continuously working on upgrading the products
quality formulation of all the products viz., Soaps,
Detergents, Cosmetics, Agarabathis, including
newer products with the heightened regulatory
measures to meet the highest international quality
standards with fully integrated product life cycle
management ensure the compliance of FDA &
REACH.
 The major thrust of R&D is committed for
developing the
natural essential
oil based products
using the natural
Sandalwood oil as
base to achieve
the new paradigm
of
competitiveness,
maximize
customer
satisfaction, to
meet the customer
requirements &
expectations.

Measuring Girth of Sandalwood Tree
Role of Government
It is prudent to simplify the regulatory regime related
felling and transit of tree species grown on non-forest
areas and farmlands. Special incentives are to be
given to the growers in the form of subsidies for
cultivation, protection and technological
upgradation of security systems.

Vision and Mission of KSDL
 Our vision is to make India to regain the glory of the
past, the largest producer of Santalum album in the
coming years by making buy back arrangement
with the potential growers, farmers &
Santalum album Linn Tree
33
List of consultancy services offered by
Institute of Wood Science and Technology
The Institute has the following facilities and expertise for rendering services to user industry and
Government and non-government organisations:
 Xylarium with authentically identified Indian and foreign wood samples, with expertise to
identify timber species.
 Authentic identification of wood-decaying fungi, insects, marine wood borers and foulers.
 Cultures of wood-decaying fungi for reference and laboratory bioassay purposes.
 Accelerated laboratory bioassay of candidate wood preservative chemicals against wooddeteriorating fungi and insects.
 Testing of timber and timber products (untreated and treated)
 Testing of timber and timber products for determining the strength properties.
 Xenotestweatherometer for accelerated weathering experiments.
 Timber seasoning kiln and expertise for setting up solar seasoning kiln.
 Pressure-treatment plant for preservative-treatment of timber.
 T.L.C., G.L.C., and H.P.L.C.
 UV, IR and Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer
 X-ray Fluorescence Analyzer
 Flow Injection Analyzer
 Nitrogen Analyzer
 Bomb Calorimeter
 Chemical analysis of oils, gums, tannins and other non-wood forest products.
 A seed orchard of sandal for supplying quality seeds.
 Advice on nursery practices, silviculture and plant protection against fungal and insect
attack.
 Transfer of technology for improved agroforestry systems.
 Advice on protection and management of mangrove ecosystems from biodeterioration pointof-view.
 Advice on simple, inexpensive wood-preservation techniques (sap displacement method).
 Advice on timber utilisation for catamaran, other fishing crafts and marine structures.
 Model nursery at Nagaroor in collaboration with State Forest Department has been
established.

INSTITUTE OF WOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education)
An Autonomous Body of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of India
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru – 560 003, India Website: www.iwst.icfre.gov.in/awwtc/awwtc.htm
Ph: 080-22190148, 150 Fax: 080-23340529 E-Mail: awtc_iwst@icfre.org,dir_iwst@icfre.org
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
New Initiatives for Sandalwood
Cultivation in Telangana
L. Venkatram Reddy,
Director of Horticulture, Telangana.
Email: horticulture.telangana@gmail.com
I
n India, more than 90% of the sandalwood is
distributed in the states of Karnataka (70%) and
Tamil Nadu (20%) covering around 9,000 km2. In
Telangana, Sandalwood cultivation is being
promoted since 2018 only. Though returns on
sandalwood cultivation are very high, naturally
grown sandalwood tree takes 30 years to be ready for
harvesting. However, intensive cultivation in
organic methods gives quick results in 10 to 15 years.

(vi) Demonstration of water use efficiency: Farm
ponds, drip irrigation, Water harvesting &
storage structures
Agro-climatically, few parts of Telangana are
suitable for Sandalwood cultivation. Telangana
covers 48% by red Soil, with larger part in
Mahabubnagar, Nalgonda, Karimnagar, Khammam,
Rangareddy, Nizamabad districts. The average
rainfall in Telangana is 900 to 1100 mm and average
temperature between 10 to 35-40o c.
Telangana Government has established two HiTech Nurseries under Sub-Mission on Agro Forestry
at Centre of Excellence (CoE), Mulugu, with a
production capacity of 2.00 lakhs plants per annum @
Rs. 40 lakhs each. CoE, Mulugu is established in an
area of 55 acres having the following facilities:
(i)
Production of Sandalwood and host plants
seedlings at Hi-Tech Nursery, CoE, Mulugu
Since 2018, with the active support of the Telangana
government, sandalwood plantations are being
raised in an area of 3363 acres covering 1928 farmers.

Demonstration of Fruit crops: Demonstration
of new crops and varieties of Fruit crops.

Iii) Demonstration of Agro Forestry crops:
Demonstration of new varieties of Agro
Forestry crops like Casuarina, Bamboo,
Sandalwood etc.

Inspiring story of innovative farmer:
Sri. P. Istharapu Reddy a farmer from Pasnour
village in Nalgond district has reaped huge profit
from raising Sandalwood plantation. His success has
given inspiration to many small and marginal
farmers in Telangana State to take up Sandalwood
plantation. He planted sandalwood on boundary of
sweet-orange orchard during the year 2002 with host
crop as Sweet Orange. After the plantation has
attained 15 years, he felled trees in 2016 and got
yield of 33 kg heartwood per tree, and total harvest of
600 kg heartwood from 18 trees. The yield of
softwood was 50 kg per tree and 900 kgs from 18
trees. From selling heart and softwood he earned an
income of Rs. 37.50 lakhs in 15 years. The details of
cost benefits associated with raising sandalwood
plantation is given in Table 1
(iii) D e m o n s t r a t i o n o f l a t e s t p r o d u c t i o n
technologies: Demonstration of Ultra High
Density Plantations (UHDP), High Density
Plantations (HDP), Raised bed with weedmat
Fertigation, Automation, Integrated Pest and
Nutrient Management.
(iv) Production of quality Planting Material:
Production & supply of high quality grafts/
budlings/ seedlings of Fruit crops/ Agro
Forestry Sps to the farmers.
(v)
Capacity building of farmers: Creating
awareness to the farmers through Training and
capacity building.
35
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Table 1: Cost-benefit analysis of raising sandalwood
Sl. No. Particulars
1
No of sandalwood plants
Details
18 plants (Border plantation)
2
Host crops grown
Sweet orange
3
Year of planting
2002
4
Year of Harvesting
2016 (Age: 15 years)
5
Size of plant during harvest
Height: 20-25 ft, diameter: 3 ft
6
Contact No.

6304391957
7
Yield (per tree.) / total yield from 18 plants
8
9
Softwood kgs
50 kg / 900 kgs
Heartwood kgs
33 kg / 600 kgs
Total Expenditure (for 36 plants for 15 years)
18 SW + 19 Sweet orange
Rs. 1,50,000/-
Sale price (Rs. per kg.)
a. Softwood
Rs. 500 per kg
b.Heartwood
Rs. 5500 per kg
10
Total value of Sandalwood crop
(for 18 plants after 15 years)
Rs 4,50,000 SW + Rs. 33,00,000
HW = Rs. 37,50,000/-
11
Additional income from Host species
(from 18 Sweet orange plants for 3 years)
@ Rs. 300/- per plant per year
Up to 3 years Rs. 20,000
(Negligible only)
12
Gross income obtained SW+ Sweet orange after 15 years
Rs. 37,50,000
Net Income from 36 plants after 15 years
Rs. 36,00,000
Another farmer Sri. Ravinder Reddy from Bacharam
village in Rangareddy District has taken up Sandalwood
plantation in 32 acres in block plantation in 2016 with
Casuarina as host plants and Melia dubia as intercrop.
Farmer is planning to harvest Melia dubia in 2022. As on
today Sandalwood plants are very healthy with good girth
of main trunk. Farmer is expecting an income of Rs. 5.00 Cr
per acre (Rs. 160 Cr. from 32 acres) after 2030.

Role of Government in promotion of
Sandalwood cultivation:
To promote Sandalwood plantation in Telangana,
Government has launched “Sub-Mission on Agro
Forestry” during 2018-19. Department of Horticulture,
Govt. of Telangana has established a nursery for supply of
quality planting material along with primary and
secondary host plants. Conducts awareness on cultivation
of Sandalwood in Telangana.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
36
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Opportunities for Farmers to Generate Higher
Income through Cultivation of Sandalwood
in Rajasthan and Gujarat.
Maheshwar T. Hegde and M. R Baloch,
Arid Forest Research Institute, Jodhpur, Rajasthan.

I
n India, about 53 % of land area of country
comprises two important eco-regions: the arid
and semiarid regions. The arid zone of India
alone occupies an area of 3.2 lakhs km2 which is
about 13% of the geographical area of the country.
More than 80% of total arid land areas of the country
are present in Rajasthan (61%) and Gujrat
(20%)(Kalsi, 2007). The main problems of agriculture
in these areas are low availability of rainfall and
irrigation water and high frequency of droughts,
adversely affecting the crop growth. Under these
circumstances raising crops successfully is a gamble
for farmers often with high rate of failures. However,
here agroforestry which brings in cultivation of trees
along crops has the ability to stabilize the farm
income to some extent.

take up farm/agro-forestry for higher income
generation by evolving technology, extension and
credit support packages and removing constraints
for development of agroforestry".
High value trees like sandalwood and red
sanders-based agroforestry and farm forestry have
the potential to improve the income of farmers to
levels hitherto unheard by the farmers. The very
high price and high demand for the wood and wood
products of these two species are encouraging the
farmers to cultivate these species in their land.
Commercial cultivation of sandalwood has gained
substantial momentum in India since liberalization
of rules regarding sandalwood cultivation in 2001
and 2002 in traditional sandalwood growing states of
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. In recent times there has
been a spurt in sandalwood farming in states like
Maharashtra, Telangana, and Andhra Pradesh.
However, sandalwood farming has taken off in a
bigger way in non-traditional sandalwood areas in
states like Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh.
Farmers in arid and semi-arid parts of western
Indian regions like Gujarat, Rajasthan and
Maharashtra are cultivating sandalwood
intensively to maximize the returns. In Gujarat alone
more than 20, 000 ha are under sandalwood
cultivation in 2017 as per Gujarat Sandalwood
Growers Association (Mishra et al., 2018b).
Sandalwood farming especially, sandalwood based
agroforestry has immense potential in terms of
revenue generation and optimal utilization of land
and resources. The high-income potential of
sandalwood agroforestry or farm forestry has
encouraged some corporate business groups venture
into raising sandalwood plantations in arid and
semi-arid areas.

Agroforestry has significant potential to provide
employment to rural and urban population through
production, industrial application and value
addition ventures. Current estimates show that
about 65 % of the country’s timber requirement is met
from trees grown on farms. Agroforestry also
generates significant employment opportunities
(National Agroforestry Policy 2014). Given the fact
that land-holding size is shrinking, tree farming
combined with agriculture is perhaps the only way
forward to optimize farm productivity and thus,
enhancing livelihood opportunities of small farmers,
landless and the women.
The National Agriculture Policy of India (2000)
had pointed out that, "agriculture has become a
relatively unrewarding profession due to generally
unfavorable price regime and low value addition,
causing abandoning of farming and increasing
migration from rural areas." One of the goals of the
policy is ‘Improving the productivity; employment,
income and livelihood opportunities of rural
households, especially of the smallholder farmers
through agroforestry’. Further the Policy
recommended that “Farmers will be encouraged to
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
37
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood in Rajasthan
profitably be cultivated in non-traditional areas like
Rajasthan and Gujarat and heartwood and oil
content in cultivated sandalwood may almost be
comparable with that in cultivated traditional areas
like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.

In Rajasthan, natural sandalwood is restricted to
the southern and eastern part of the state. Good
Natural regeneration is found in Haldighat forest of
Nathdwara range Rajasmand Forest Division),
Bhavarmatha block of Choti Sadri range (Pratapgarh
Division). Natural host associated is found to be
Acacia nilotica, Acacia catechu, Acacia senegal, Prosopis
cineraria, Prosopis juliflora, Pongamia pinnata etc. Even
grass Imperata cylindrica is found as host. Larger
girth size (>30cm girth) found missing in forests,
however, larger trees found in protected areas , old
havelis, circuit house etc., Sandalwood trees are also
found in trenches and mounds in agricultural fields
(Jain et al., 2007).

Legal aspects of Sandalwood cultivation in
Gujarat and Rajasthan.
As recently as 2002, state governments, especially
in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, had a monopoly over
the control of all sandalwood resources. State laws
specified that all sandalwood trees growing on any
land, including private lands, belonged to the
government. However, the landowners were
responsible for preserving the trees on their
respective lands. Only the government had the right
to sell or trade the wood. This system neither
deterred the illegal and indiscriminate harvesting of
sandalwood by smugglers, nor did it help conserve
the species in its natural habitat. Moreover, the
monopolistic laws acted as a huge disincentive for
planting of sandalwood on private lands. Farmers
even destroyed the saplings that naturally grew on
their lands (Viswanath et al., 2009).

A survey was carried out in 12 locations across
various districts/forest divisions in Rajasthan for
sandalwood populations and trees were sampled for
estimating heartwood content and oil through core
wood sampling (Jain et al., 2007). The results revealed
that oil content varied between 0.9%-3.0% across
various girth classes which was slightly lower
compared to similar girth trees in natural forests of
southern India. The growth rate of trees and
heartwood content were comparable with that
reported in various studies in southern India. This
study confirmed the tremendous scope of arid and
semi-arid regions of Rajasthan growing quality
sandalwood plantations.

Two major producer states in India- Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu relaxed the existing forest rules and
regulations related to sandalwood in 2001 and 2002.
The goal of modified policies was to encourage
private cultivation of sandalwood by farmers.
However, landowners cannot fell the sandalwood
trees without government permission or use them
for personal purposes, and they can sell them onlyto
government agencies through prescribed
procedures. Farmer is entitled for only 80% of the
auction value of the wood in Tamil Nadu and 70% in
Karnataka.

Mishra et al (2018a) studied heartwood and oil
content in various girth class trees ranging between
30 to ≥ 80cm from 22 locations across seven states
during 2015-2016. Their study included trees from
four locations namely, Jodhpur, Udaipur, Pali and
Sadri. The heartwood content varied from 46% in 3040cm girth classtrees to 78% in > 80cm girth class
trees. The heartwood content in sandalwood trees
grown in Rajasthan was comparable to heart wood
content in trees grown in other states including
natural sandalwood. However, oil content varied
from 0.58% to 1.6% in various girth class trees and it
was significantly lower than oil content found in
natural trees of Marayoor (Kerala). It was
comparable to the oil content found in trees grown in
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Orissa
and Punjab.

In Gujarat five tree species namely Sag (Tectona
grandis), Sisam (Dalbergia latifolia), Khair (Acacia
cetachu), Chandan (Santalum album) and Mahudo
(Madhuca indica) have been designated as “Reserve
Trees” which require permission for cutting and
transport from competent authority. During 2015,
Gujarat has revised the procedure regarding
permission from forest department for cutting trees
to encourage cultivation and supply of timber from
agricultural land. The procedure is online and
consists of several steps which are time bound. These
The above studies indicated that sandalwood can
38
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
online application and permission procedures are
aimed at removing bureaucratic hassles for farmers
and merchants.

content under managed conditions and effect of
seed sources on all these aspects.
4 Currently, there is paucity of data on
sandalwood growth under various climatic and
edaphic factors, espacement and various hosts
under agroforestry situations in Gujarat and
Rajasthan. Effect of hosts on heartwood and oil
yield is largely not understood. Cultivation
packages also need to be standardized according
to the area’s agro climatic situation, existing
cropping pattern, and compatibility of
sandalwood with other annual crops.
5 Raising sandalwood plantation using seedlings
from seeds would result in variations in growth,
heartwood, and oil content as these traits are
largely genetically controlled. For large scale
production of uniform planting stocks of high
yielding clones tissue culture is the only option as
other micro propagation techniques are not
feasible in sandalwood. However, tissue culture
protocols have only been standardized under
laboratory conditions in research institutions and
these protocols have not yet reached field
conditions.
6 Sandalwood is highly prone to theft and
smuggling after 4-5 years of planting and until its
maturity (14-15 years). Protecting the sandalwood
trees from smugglers is a major problem for
farmers as well as government agencies
throughout India.
7 There is an urgent need to establish joint tree
protection force by the state/central governments
by involving both police and forest department
personnel to help protect and gather intelligence
data regarding smuggling of valuable forest tree
resources both in government and private land.

Issues/problems in Sandalwood cultivation
1 Sandalwood cutting, possession and transit rules
vary from state to state in the country. Most of the
states have their own rules and some states do not
have sandalwood cutting rules. Thus, the present
policy regime the financial profitability of
sandalwood cultivation is varied by the restrictive
policies which deny farmers the full market value
for their produce and compel them to go through
elaborate bureaucratic procedures to receive the
benefits. Hence, revamping of legal provisions
related to sandalwood uniformly throughout the
country is urgently needed to facilitate free trade
and markets to ensure higher and speedy returns
to farmers, thereby encouraging private
cultivation of sandalwood (Viswanath et al. , 2009).
2 Quality Planting Stock (QPM) is not available for
farmers in Rajasthan and Gujarat states and
private nurseries sell seedlings from unknown
sources. There is an urgent need to create
improved seed sources of sandalwood for
producing quality planting stock.
3 Scientific management inputs are lacking in
raising sandalwood plantation and obtaining
maximum heartwood and oil yield. Research gaps
also exist regarding the optimum age of harvesting
under plantations, heartwood yield, factors
affecting yield, age of heartwood initiation, and
relationship between tree girth and heartwood
References
Jain S.H, Ranjana Arya and Hemant Kumar. 2007. Distribution of sandal (Santalum album L.), current growth
rates, predicted yield of heartwood and oil content and future potential in semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, India. Forests, Trees and Livelihoods 17: 261-266.
Kalsi, R, 2007. Galliformes of arid and semi arid zones of IndiaIn: Sathyakumar, S. and K. Sivakumar (eds.).
Galliformes of India. ENVIS Bulletin: Wildlife and Protected Areas, Vol. 10 (1). Wildlife Institute of India,
Dehradun, India.
Mishra B., Sandeep C., Arade S., Subbanna S.and Viswanath S. (2018b). Assessment of heartwood and oil content
of Santalum album Linn.Indian Forester, 144 (7) : 675-685.
Mishra, B., Chakraborty S, Sandhya M. C., Viswanath S. (2018a) Sandalwood farming in India: problems and
prospects. Indian J Trop Biodiv 26(1): 1-12.
Viswanath S., Dhanya B. and Rathore, T. S. 2009. Domestication of Sandal (Santalum album L.) in India: constraints
and prospects Asia-Pacific Agroforestry Newsletter No. 34 9-12.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
39
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Present scenario and prospects of
Sandalwood (Santalum album L.)
cultivation in Rajasthan and Gujarat
Introduction
T
ag of royal tree to the
sandalwood coupled
with cumbersome
rules/policies were against farmers
and industries, led the biggest
setback for taking up of
sandalwood plantations in private
land. It was only after amendment
of policies/rules related to the
cultivation of sandalwood harvest
and trade in 2001 and 2002 by the
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu State
Governments, respectively, rights
were given to the farmer
/industries to own sandalwood
plantation. This reformation has
promoted cultivation of S. album in
private land. There is a huge
demand of quality planting stock of
S. album in India by the farmers.
The Institute of Wood Science and
Technology (IWST), Bangalore has
played an important role in
development of package of
practices for the raising of quality
planting stock (QPM), plantation
technology and through training,
trained human resource for
promotion of sandalwood
cultivation in India.
After reformation of
sandalwood cultivation practices
plantations are raised by the
farmers in most of the states in the
country. Estimated area under
cultivation of Sandalwood is
around 15,000-20,000 ha
(conservative figure). Semi-arid
areas of Gujarat and Rajasthan are
T.S. Rathore1,4, S.S. Rathore2, A.K.Chauhan2 and B.R. Choudhary3,
. Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bengaluru.
2
. Arid Forest Research Institute, New Pali Road, Jodhpur.
3
. Agriculture University, Jodhpur, Mandore Road, Jodhpur.
4
. ZSB-221, BJS colony, Jodhpur, Jodhpur.
1
suitable for Sandalwood cultivation. In Gujarat about 1000 ha area is
under cultivation of Sandalwood in farmer’s field with different host.
Similarly, there is growing interest of Sandalwood cultivation in
Rajasthan as a agroforestry species. Due to suitable climate and interest
of farmers. There is immense potential of Sandalwood cultivation and
value addition in these states.

2.0 Host Requirement
Sandalwood is hemi root parasite tree species, require primary host at
nursery and plantation stages, and support growth for 1-2 years.
Intermediate host is essential to support Sandalwood growth after
primary host for 3-4 years till it establishes haustorial connection with
long term host species. Host provides mainly nitrogen, potassium,
phosphorous major source of essential elements. Apart from this, host
also provides other element and readymade food to support growth of
Sandalwood.
It has been observed in Rajasthan that Zizyphus mauritiana, Acacia
senegal and Acacia nilotica favoured good growth of S. album and can be
used as a long term host, apart from these these, C. equisetifolia and
Emblica officinalis (Anwala) are good host. In Gujarat (Mehsana),
Casuarina equisetifolia and Punica granatum, Citrus aurantifolia and Acacia
catechu were used as a long term host. Though, the best growth was
observed with (lemon), but after 6th year entire plantation of Citrus was
wiped out by the S. album. Casuarina equisetifolia favoured good growth
of S. album in line plantation, but suppressed growth in block plantation
in Gujarat, due to over growth of C. equisetifolia as a result of more
competition for light, water and nutrients. Emblica officinalis and Mango
can be used as a long term host. In Rajasthan Prosopis cineraria can be
good long term host of Sandalwood.
3.0 Management of plantation
As such there are no systematic studies on management practices of
Sandalwood cultivation. Based on the field observation, split dose of
compost about 5-10 kg per plant twice in a year (i.e. Feb. and Sept.)
favoured good growth of host and S. album. Biofertilizer viz; AM, PSB,
41
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
clear bole of S. album trees at the age of 6 years was
greater with C.arantium than the other two host
species. Heartwood formation was initiated in the
trees >9 cm diameter at breast height (DBH)
irrespective of host species. (Singh et al.,2018).
However, C.arantium was wiped out by the S. album
after 7 years. The P.granatum favoured greater value
of DBH, height ratio as a long term host, but it
required to be verified in replicated trials.
Sandalwood plantation in Gujarat has increased after
2010 and it is estimated that total plantations of
different age groups is about 1000ha area in
Himatnagar, Banas Kanta, Mehsana, Ahmedabad,
Baroda, Anand, Surat etc. Gujarat Sandalwood
growers association, Gujarat State Forest
Department and Anand Agriculture University are
promoting and supporting Sandalwood cultivation
in Gujarat.

Azotobactor and Azospirillum favoured better growth.
Application of Trichoderma viride or T. hazeanum act as
a bio-control agent against collar rotting fungi.
Irrigation is very important particularly during
summer and winter. Drip irrigation is better than
flood irrigation to maintain proper drainage.
Weeding and soil working are essential periodically
or as and when required.

4.0 Sandalwood cultivation in Gujarat
In Gujarat S. album plantation started at small level
in around 2004-2005 in Surat, Baroda and
Ahmedabad. The first large scale plantation was
established at Mesana in 2007-2008 in about 6ha area
using C. equisetifolia, Punica granatum (Pomegranate)
and Citrus aurantium (Lemon) as long term host.
Survival, height, collar diameter, crown size and
Large scale production of sandalwood seedlings in private nurseries
Mehsana
Himmatnagar
5.0 Sandalwood cultivation in Rajasthan
nursery, which induced heartwood and oil content.
In Arid Forest Research Institute (AFRI), Jodhpur
Campus few trees of 8-10 years old are growing
luxuriently. During past 8 years plantations of
Sandalwood have been established by the farmers in
agriculture field as boundary plantations as well as
block plantations with different host plants like;
Anwala (Phyllanthus emblica), Zizyphus mauritiana,
Acacia nilotica, Casurina equisetifolia, Gmelina arborea
and Melia dubia. Plantations have been established in
agriculture land in Pali, Sirohi, Rajasmand, Udaipur,
Jodhpur, Barmer, Nagaur, Sikar, Jaipur, Alwar and
Ganga Nagar area. Arid Forest Research Institute,
Jodhpur is conducting training of farmers for the
Sandalwood is found naturally in Southern and
Eastern Rajasthan, particularly in Aravalli ranges
from Sirohi to Pratapgarh in semi-arid regions. Apart
from Forest, S. album is also found naturally in
agriculture land, temples premises, old havellis etc.
Small plantation was also established and oil content
varied from 0.9 to 3 percent (Jain et al., 2007). Natural
regeneration is common in forest and private lands in
Aravalli ranges. Trees of small girth can be observed
in Sirohi, Sadari, Desuri, Udaipur and Pratapgarh
areas. Due to illicit cutting > 40 cm girth trees are rare
to locate. Central Arid Zone Research Institute
(CAZRI, Jodhpur) planted few trees in their campus
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Anand
42
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood Plantations in Rajasthan
cultivation of Sandalwood. The AFRI, Jodhpur has
also established multi locational trials of S.
album with different host plants in
Rajasthan and Gujarat. The Rajasthan State
Forest Department should come forward to
help farmers in promoting Sandalwood
cultivation and liberalize policies on
harvest and sale, which is very essential in
motivating farmers. National Medicinal
Plant Board and Agroforestry Mission are
AFRI Campus Jodhpur
Chota Guda, Pali
Khimel, Pali
promoting Sandalwood cultivation. As
(10 years old)
(1.5 years old)
(3 years old)
compare to Gujarat, level of Sandalwood
scope of demand will be more.
cultivation in Rajasthan is very less (about 100 ha).
Gujarat and Rajasthan are most suitable states,
But, there is a great potential of S. album cultivation in
where large scale commercial cultivation of S. album
semi-arid regions of Rajasthan where rainfall is about
can be carried out by the farmers as well as
500-800 mm and irrigation facilities are available. In
industries.
This is mainly due to availability of land,
addition, Rajasthan has favorable climatic conditions
suitable climatic conditions and entrepreneurships.
for early heart wood formation. Scope of value
Both the state governments must be pro-active to to
addition is immense in Rajasthan due to large
provide all possible support to the farmers and
number of wood based handicraft industries.
industries to remove hurdles of harvest and sale of
Sandalwood and its value added products.
6.0 Future prospects
Medicinal Plant Board and Agroforestry Mission
The Sandalwood has wide adaptation to various
should continue their support in Sandalwood
types of soil and climatic conditions, which provide
cultivation to farmers. Niti Ayog, Government of
scope for cultivation in the area facing temperature
India has already constituted a Committee on
from subzero to semi-arid regions (45°C) in
Sandalwood development in India and hopefully, of
Rajasthan with irrigation facilities. Sandalwood is
which outcome will take to bring back glory of
one amongs three tree species (Agarwood,
Sandalwood in India.
Redsandes and Sandalwood), which are highly
prized and sold by weight. In past, plantations were
7.0 Issues in promoting Sandalwood
raised by the State Forest Departments particularly,
cultivation and their possible solutions
in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and
Kerala. After liberalization of cultivation
i Lack of genetically improved seed and clonal
policies/rules by the Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
material : The erstwhile Sandalwood Research
State Governments in 2001 and 2002, respectively,
Centre, Bangalore has taken up tree improvement
Sandalwood is largely cultivated by the farmers and
programme of Sandwood by selection of plus tree
Sandalwood based industries like; DS Group, Surya
based on commercial traits, established
Vinayaka in Katni and Shivani in Madhya Pradesh,
germplasm bank, clonal seed orchard etc. In past
Karnataka Soaps and Detergent Ltd. (KSDL) in
due to illicit activities these were damaged. The
Karnataka. Presently, farmers of most of the states in
IWST, Bangalore had restocked germplasm bank
India are cultivating Sandalwood in their farmland.
and established progeny trails. However, there is
Estimated demand of Sandalwood is about 4000a lack of quality seed and most of the planting
5000 MT and oil about 100 MT, which is likely to
materials raised by the private nurseries are from
increase drastically due to wide and expanded uses
undefined or unimproved seed. Only Maryoor
of Sandalwood and its products in international as
Forest Division has protected mature trees as a
well as national markets. Pharmaceutical,
known source of seed, which can be used till
aromatherapy, handicraft are few examples where
improved seed is available.

43
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
ii There is a need of selection of candidate plus tree
(CPTs)/ plus trees (PTs) based on commercial
traits (growth, heartwood and oil content) from
the various plantation from the country and
establish germplasm bank, progeny trials and
clonal seed orchards at highly protected sites as a
source of future genetically improved seed and
clonal material for plantation programme. This
will fulfill requirement of quality planting
material.

cultivation: There is a need to generate
Scientific data on package of practices for the
cultivation and management of Sandalwood
plantations for the maximum financial return.
vi Variable policies/rules/norms of the state forest
department in the country: Government support
farmers and Sandalwood based industries by
liberalizing Sandalwood cultivation, harvest and
sale rules/policies on the lines of the states of
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change,
Government of India should take initiative to
regulate uniform rules/norms/act across the
country in all the states. Every State Forest
Department should take lead in this matter to
promote farmers in Sandalwood cultivation to
increase their income and employment by
liberalizing cultivation, harvest and sale policies.

iii Lack of knowledge of good host species based on
different agro-climatic conditions: currently
farmers are using long term host based of
scattered information or with their own vision.
There is a need to identify the best compatible
species of long term host which favour maximum
growth of Sandalwood. Possible solution may
come out from the All India Coordinated project
being implemented by the ICFRE, institutes.

vii Protection from illicit cutting and smuggling of
Sandalwood: This is the most serious issues to be
faced by the farmers. Possible solution lies in
insurance of plantation like crop insurance,
sensor based alarm system, keeping watch dogs,
social fencing, guarding at the age of 10-15 years
of age etc. Government may impose long
imprisonment, and heavy financial penalties on
the smugglers and illicit Sandalwood cutters.

iv Ideal spacing between plant to plant and row to
row : Presently farmers are following spacing like
3mX3m, 3mX4m, 4mX4m, 5mX5m based on the
local advise of the private nursery persons. Based
on Scientific studies, farmers need to be educated
for standard spacing for Sandal wood cultivation
for maximum financial return.
v Lack of complete package of practices for
References
Jain, S.H., Arya, R. and Kumar, H. 2007. Distribution of Sandal (Santalum album L.) current growth rates,
predicted yield of heartwood and oil content and future potential in semi-arid and arid regions of Rajasthan,
India. Forests, Tree and Livelihood 17: 261-266.
Rathore, T.S., Rangaswamy, M., and Dubey, A.K. 2008c, In vitro propagation of sandalwood (Santalum album L.)
through direct adventitious shoot induction from the explants of mature trees. In: Proceeding of National
seminar on conservation, improvement, cultivation and management of sandal (Santalum album L.). pp 92-96.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
44
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Prospects and Opportunities of Sandalwood
Cultivation in Uttar Pradesh
Introduction
I
n India more than 90 % of
Sandalwood production is
concentrated in Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu, however the species
occurs all over the country with
varied growth, heartwood
production and oil contents. The
tree flourishes well from sea level
up to 1800 m altitude in different
types of soil like sandy, clayey red
soils, lateritic, loamy and even in
black cotton soils. Trees growing on
stony or gravelly soils are known to
have highly scented wood.
Sandalwood tree can grow from
moderate rainfall of 600 to 1600
mm, in places with long periods of
drought. The species can withstand
temperatures from 4- 460C
providing immense adaptation
plasticity which can be utilized
while introducing it to nontraditional areas.
Due to its high value and the
demand, attention is being given
for establishing sandalwood
plantations in the tropical region by
the farmers, NGOs, and private
sector companies. Sandalwood tree
adapts well in terms of growth,
heartwood and oil content under
diverse locality factors. Thus,
survival and establishment in Uttar
Pradesh and adjoining areas will
not be difficult if appropriate site
selections and management
interventions are done.

Scope of Sandalwood
Cultivation in Uttar Pradesh
Generally S. album is found in the
dry deciduous forests of Deccan
Alok Yadav and Sanjay Singh,
Forest Research Centre for Eco-rehabilitation,
Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh.

Plateau, mostly in the states of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, The
evergreen tree regenerates naturally when conditions are favorable and
has been spreading its distribution.
In Uttar Pradesh also a large area covers dry deciduous forest type.
The mains regions of these forests are the plains of Ganga, Yamuna and
their tributaries. These forests are found in all parts of the plains and
usually in Eastern, Central and Western regions which include
Lucknow, Raebareli, Unnao, Ghaziabad districts of the state. Large
tracts of deciduous forests have been cleared for cultivation in the state.
One research study has also reported occurrence of sandalwood
(Santalum album) in the forest reserves of Bundelkhand forest division,
district Jhansi. On reviewing the literature it was found that some well
grown trees of Sandalwood already exist in various districts of Uttar
Pradesh.
Since ancient period India has been known for its sandalwood,
however during the last decade farmers have developed interest in
cultivation of the plants. Earlier, it was mainly confined to the forests of
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala and state government’s plantations.
There was lack of cultivation on private agricultural land in other parts
of the country. However a policy change in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
allowed people to grow sandalwood which has later inspired other
states.
Despite a growth in Sandalwood cultivation, India is far behind to
regain its leadership position in global sandalwood trade anytime soon.
In fact, growers are unable to meet the domestic demand. To meet out
the demand of sandalwood tree, suitable cultivation practices at nontraditional areas is necessary. Identification and mapping of potential
habitats in different parts of country is necessary so that the declining
native population may be conserved.
As per an estimate, during last decade lot of plantations have come up
on private and agriculture land in north Indian states like Gujarat,
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttarakhand, to
promote the sandalwood trade in country. In eastern Uttar Pradesh,
most of the farmers have very small land holdings, therefore block
plantation would not be preferred by them where the waiting period
yields no results at all. However, sandalwood agroforestry in the form of
bund plantation may be better option, where farmer may get income for
seven to eight years. Organic management of the sandalwood also
attracts farmers as it reduces the management cost of cultivation.

45
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
concluded that since last few years farmers have
initiated sandalwood planation at their fields as
block and bund plantation. Farmers of Pratapgarh,
Varanasi, Kaushambi, Sultanpur, Kannauj and
Ayodhya districts are engaged in sandalwood
cultivation. Mr. Utkrist Pandey, a progressive farmer
has started large scale farming of Sandalwood at
Pratapgarh district of Uttar Pradesh in 2018 after
getting training on cultivation techniques of
Sandalwood at IWST Bengaluru. In general farmers
are planting Sandalwood seedlings on their field
bunds. However, block plantations are also being
adopted by large farmers with 220-230 plants per
acre. Farmers have established on farm nursery of
sandalwood.

Status of sandalwood cultivation in Uttar
Pradesh
Sandalwood is capable of growing in different
kinds of soils like sand, clay, laterite, loam, and blackcotton soil (avoiding water-logged conditions). Even
very poor and rocky soils can support sandalwood. A
pilot study was conducted on seed germination
potential of Santalum album at Forest Research Centre
for Eco-rehabilitation, Padila Research Nursery,
Prayagraj. It was observed that seed germination of
Santalum album was 40% under the normal condition.
Further studies on growth patterns and Sandalwood
based agroforestry are also being conducted in
various research
organizations and
universities. The
apprehension of low
h e a r t w o o d
production and oil
content seems
cautionary and
unsound in the light
of scanty and
insignificant
s c i e n t i f i c
investigation been
carried out on the
aspects. It is known
that both heartwood
production and oil content increases significantly
with increasing age. Therefore, it is possible that a
higher harvestable age may be prescribed for
plantations in non-traditional areas compared to
native growth range. The activity will still be
beneficial for the farmers.

Fragrance & Flavour Development Centre
(FFDC), a premium institute of Govt. of India has
been established in Uttar Pradesh with an aim to
serve as an interface between essential oil, fragrance
and flavour industry and the R & D institutions both
in the field of Agro Technology and chemical
technology. Sandalwood is one of the main species
on which FFDC is focusing to upgrade the status of
farmers and industry engaged in the aromatic
cultivation and its processing. Seedlings of
sandalwood are also provided by FFDC for
promotion of sandalwood cultivation among the
farmers In future FFDC may be a potential buyer for
sandalwood in the north India region due to which
large scale plantations are also coming up in Kannuj
district. Farmers in the Teria districts are also
engaged in sandalwood cultivation.

Planting Stock
Quality of planting stock is a major concern among
farmers. They have a hitch during procurement of
seedlings as its source and quality is not well known
to them and they feel that may have future
repercussions in terms of quality of end product at
the time of selling FFDC has standardized
technologies for Sandalwood plant nursery in the
region Seedling of sandalwoods plants were sold to
the farmers and their queries and advance bookings
for planting material reflects the future prospects of
its cultivation among farmer’s/ growers’ interest.

A recent study recorded overall oil content
ranging from 1.0 - 4.0 % in Madhya Pradesh. Natural
populations in the girth class of 70-80 cm in. As per
Arun Kurmi , Chairman, Progressive Chandan
farmers Association, Punjab studies has been
conducted to assess the oil content of sandalwood
plants in Punjab and the results show that 3% oil
content were available in the north India trees which
is comparable to south Indian average.

Farmers engaged in Sandalwood Plantation
Famers feel that a lot of financial viability exists in
sandalwood cultivation and continuous increase in
Based on available information it may be
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
46
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
prices of sandalwood and oil. This is the reason behind that Sandalwood cultivation is slowly gaining pace in
non-traditional northern India states like MP, Gujarat, and Punjab etc. However some farmers are concerned
about security for protecting a mature sandalwood tree would be tough task for a farmer. They feel that lot of
money will be required in future for protection of plants. It will attract theft once the trees are ready for harvest
as lots of incidents are reported from Lucknow, Sitapur, Barabanki and other districts where mature sandalwood
trees were chopped off by the smugglers. Therefore farmers expect government to help by providing suitable
protection measures so that more farmers may take up sandalwood cultivation in future.

Concern about Legal Issues:
In Uttar Pradesh a list of 29 species has been released by government for which prior permission is required for
harvesting of the tree. However, Sandalwood is not mentioned in that. However there is a feeling among
cultivators that sooner or later some policy may come up from State govt. for promoting sandalwood cultivation
and its legal nitty gritty.
Liberalization of rules for sandalwood cultivation in southern states has promoted its commercial cultivation
throughout the India. Sandalwood cultivation has been initiated in non-traditional sandalwood areas in north
India states like Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh As per research reports and survey conducted on
sandalwood plantations in Northern and Central, parts of the country, it is found that heartwood formation
happens generally between 6-9 years of age Farmers have a feeling that sandalwood based agro-forestry practices
has immense potential in terms of income generation and suitable utilization of land and resources.

47
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bangalore
Publications for Sale
IWST PUBLICATIONS FOR SALE
BOOKS
Sl.
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Name of the Books
Language
Rate
Gem of Peninsular India Sandalwood
Endemic Possession of Eastern Ghats: Red sanders
Biodeterioration of Timber and its Prevention in
Indian Coastal Waters - 3rd Progress Report (1982-2005)
Anatomy and Properties of Lesser Known Timbers of
North-East with particular reference to Nagaland
English
English
1,500
150
English
250
English
175
PROCEEDINGS / ABSTRACTS
Sl.
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Name of the Books
Language
Rate
Forestry, Forest Products and Coastal Population
Wood Preservation in India: Challenges, Opportunities
and strategies
Conservation, Restoration and Sustainable Management of
Mangrove Forests in India
Intellectual Property in Forestry issues
Bamboo Reserve Management & Advances in
Utilization Options
Indian Sandal wood. Compendium Abstracts of
Research carried out English
Abstracts of the Published Research Papers (1998-2007)
English
200
English
250
English
English
250
250
English
200
400
English
Free
Name of the Technical Bulletin
Language
Rate
Sandalwood
Sandalwood Tree (Pests, Diseases and their Management)
A Guide to some important timbers in South Indian markets
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal (AM) fungi as biofertilizer in forestry
Teak Heartwood Borer. AlcterogystiaCadambae (moore) and
its management
Whitefly pests in Forestry and their management
Wood Polymer Composite: New age Material
Protection of Wood from Weathering
Flower Gall Inducer of PongamiaPinnata and its management
Cultivation prospects of edible bamboo shoots in South India
Ficus Tree in Semi-arid. Agro Ecosystem of Karnataka
Bamboos of India
GuaduaanguistifoliaKunth: A Vegetable Steel Bamboo Species
Dendorocalamusstocksii (Munro): A Potential Multipurpose Species
for Peninsular India
DendorocalamusBrandisii (Munro): An ideal Bamboo Species for
Domestication in Humid Tropics
Micro propagation of Bamboo Species
Disease Alert on Eruption of Sandal Spike Disease in Conservation and
Cultivation of Indian Sandalwood
Important Insect Pests in Mangroves of Maharashtra and their Management
Genuine Mahagony – Cultivation, Management and Uses
Meliadubia Malabar Neem
Phytoplasma: Thrust for developing effective management strategies
Sandal oil: Adulteration and detection techniques
Bamboo Lumber: A sustainable alternative to solid wood
Utilization Potential of Palmyra Palm Wood (Borassusflabellifer L.)

English/Kannada
English
English
English
100
80
150
30
English
English
English
English
English
English
English
English
English
50
30
50
80
60
100
150
200
150
English
150
English
English
150
150
English
English
English
English
English
English
English
English
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
TECHNICAL BULLETINS /BROCHURES
Sl.
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
My Glorious years at Sandalwood Research Centre
Introduction
I
am delighted to write on the
nine glorious years (19771985) of Sandalwood
Research. During this period
several significant contributions
were made on sandalwood
research especially on the Tree
Improvement aspects under the
leadership of Shri. K. R. Venkatesan
IFS., Conservator of Forests.
Sandalwood Research Centre,
Bangalore.
The Forest Research Institute
(FRI), Dehra dun in 1977 had set up
12 Tree based research centers in
India and one of them was
Sandalwood Spike Research
Centre. Considerable research
work was carried out on
sandalwood spike disease since its
discovery in 1899 by McCarthy
while, research on other aspects of
sandalwood was neglected.
Hence, Shri. K. R. Venkatesan IFS.,
took out the word ‘Spike’ from the
title and renamed it as Sandalwood
Research Centre (SRC) to facilitate
research work on all aspects of
sandalwood. Later in 1986, SRC
was merged with Institute of Wood
Sciences and Technology (IWST).
In the first step more than 45
projects were identified which
consisted of All India sandalwood
survey, biosystematics,
physiology, genetics and tree
breeding, pathology, entomology,
silviculture, Nursery and
plantation Package of Practices,
Organic chemistry on sandalwood
oil and other aspects. This paper
reviews the major research work
carried out during that period.

H D Kulkarni,
Sarvabhauma Forestry & Environmental Consultancy Services,
Medchal District, Hyderabad.
E-mail: sudhaharsh17@gmail.com
All India sandalwood survey
The first authentic sandalwood survey revealed that it occurred over
an area of 9040 sq km in India of which 5245 sq km in Karnataka and 3040
sq km in Tamil Nadu were the major sandalwood bearing areas.
Sandalwood areas in Andhra Pradesh (Telangana & Andhra Pradesh)
175 sq km, Kerala 63 sq km and Madhya Pradesh (Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh) 33 sq km were recorded. In other states the sandalwood
bearing areas were less than 1 sq km (Srimathi, et. al., 1995). Over the
years the sandalwood stock in the natural forests decreased
considerably due to rampant smuggling, in adequate management, lack
of natural regeneration, felling of green trees, pests and diseases.

Tree improvement
Seed Stands and Seed production Areas
Five Seed stands (SS) at Marayoor (Kerala), Chitteries and Javadhis
(Tamil Nadu), Rayalpad and Tangli (Karnataka) were identified and
converted into Seed Production Areas (SPAs). Nearly 1325 to 2500 seed
bearing trees were retained in SPA.
Provenance trials
Sandalwood occurs mostly in southern India but it has spread beyond
southern states due to its introduction in the past. Provenance variation
in the same species have been recognized when the species moved from
one geographical region to another.
Around 11 provenances were identified with specific characteristics.

S. Name of the provenance
No.
1 Maryoor, Kerala
2
3
4
Apparent characteristics
Seed size is big, yellow / light
brown heartwood Full of
heartwood and sandalwood oil,
South Seoni, Madhya Pradesh Lush green leaves, dark brown
bark, heartwood light brown in
colour, medium heartwood and oil
content
Hardanhalli, Chamrajnagar, Medium size ovate leaves and
Karnataka
seeds, with high amount of
heartwood and sandalwood oil
Honnehatti in Bhadravathi, Lush green leaves, seeds varying in
Karnataka
size, heartwood is light brown or
Chandrakala in Shikaripura yellow in colour, full of heartwood
Sagar, Karnataka
and sandalwood oil
Tangli, Chikamangalure,
Karnataka
49
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
5
Thindlu, Hoskote, Karnataka
Small diameter trees, Full of dark
brown heartwood, sapwood width
is 2 to 4 mm. Oil content is around 2 to 3%
5 Chittor, Andhra Pradesh
Yellowish green leaves, yellow, yellow
brown heartwood colour.
6 SFRC, Coimbator,
Varying seed size. Trees with medium
Tamil Nadu
heartwood and sandalwood oil,
Heartwood colour dark brown
7 Kumbakonam (Sholapuram), Trees with ovate, lanceolate leaves,
Tamil Nadu
Heartwood colour is yellow
predominantly. Contains good amount
of heartwood and oil
8 Kurumbapatty, Chitteris
Varying seed size. Trees with small size
Javadhis, Salem, Tamil Nadu leaves, heartwood light brown to yellow
brown. Full of heartwood and oil.
9 FRL (IWST), Bangalore,
Varying leaf and seed size and shape.
Karnataka
Heartwood colour yellow, yellow
brown, brown and dark brown.
10 NZP, Hyderabad, Telangana Leaves thick, yellow green, varying seed
size. Trees with less or no heartwood,
Sandalwood oil content is around 2%.
11 Janiguda, Koraput, Orissa
Trees with ovate - elliptic leaves, seed
medium in size, heartwood colour
predominantly yellow, yellow brown.
High heartwood and oil content.

Seed source (SS) or provenance trials were established in 1981 at Nallal
(Karnataka) with 21 seed sources (3.14 ha) and Kuderu (Andhra
Pradesh) with 10 seed sources (0.24 ha) in 1982.

Plus trees and propagation
Totally 79 plus trees were selected – 39 in Karnataka, 31 in Tamil nadu,
6 in Andhra Pradesh and 3 in Kerala and the plus trees were vegetatively
multiplied by scion derived from them by cleft grafting. The plus trees
thus multiplied were planted in Germplasm Bank (GB) and Clonal seed
Orchards (CSO).
Vegetative propagation through rooting of stem cuttings (mist
propagation / macropropagation) was not successful as only 3 to 5 %
rooting was achieved. Tissue culture plants though easily produced in
the laboratory were not successful in field out planting hence, one
cannot see large scale tissue culture sandalwood plantations in India.
For selection of plus trees the author and team use to visit sandal
forest areas along with the senior forest officials of Karnataka.
The officials use to make fun saying “you are making the job of
smuggler easy as they may knock off the selected tree with
heartwood (plus tree) leaving other trees with less or no
heartwood”. Hence, as soon as the tree was selected, seed and
scion material were collected for multiplication and the
germplasm was conserved in the germplasm bank.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
50
Germplasm and Clonal
Bank
The Germplasm bank / Clonal
bank were planted at Gottipura
(Karnataka) with 60 clones in 1980
and 1982, Karvatnagar with 10
clones and Kurumbatty with 15
clones (Tamil Nadu) in 1983.
Nearly 35 different biotypes of
sandalwood were also planted in
Gottipura (Karnataka) in 1982. (Fig.
1)
Clonal Seed Orchards
Clonal seed orchards (CSO) was
established at Nallal (Karnataka) in
1982 with 25 clones in 1.35 ha (Fig.
3) The second CSO was planted at
Akkarampalli, Tirupati (Andhra
Pradesh) in 1983 with 30 clones in 1
ha area. The 3rd CSO was planted
in 1984 with 30 clones in 1.5 ha area.
The first CSO had permutated
neighbor design with single ring
isolation while, the other two
CSO’s had permutated neighbor
design with double ring isolation.

Open pollinated half-sib
progeny trials
Seeds collected from 79 plus trees
were germinated and seedlings
planted in 2.05 ha area in 1980 at
Nallal, Bangalore, Karnataka.
Singletree plot design with
triangular spacing was followed in
establishing this half-sib progeny
trials. The plot was assessed after
planting at 18 months and majority
of trees attained 1 to 1.5 m height
and were flowering and it was the
first report of precocious flowering
in sandalwood as normally trees
start flowering after 4 years after
planting in the field.

Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Release of Sandalwood Clone
Around 20,000 trees were tested with Presslers
Increment Borer by the all India sandal survey
team and the author has taken more than 15000
core samples and was referred jocularly as
“Head Borer”. When the author use to complain
about the chest pain due to borer operations, Shri
K. R. Venkatesan IFS and R. A. Srimathi, SRO &
HoD of Genetics & Tree Breeding Branch of SRC
use to say, we will recommend you for Gunnies
book of world record for highest number of
boring samples obtained!

SRC clone -1 was released in 1982 in a function
held at SRC/FRL, Bangalore and this SRC-1 clone
was handed over for cultivation to shri. S. Shyam
Sunder IFS., Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
Karnataka. This clone was derived from plus tree T01 Sholapuram Pudukottai, Tanjavur, which was 8
year old in sandalwood planation having 8 kg of
heartwood. This plus tree was exceptionally fast
growing (GBH 59 cms) and height of 9.8 m with good
amount of heartwood and sandalwood oil.
The estimates of the expected genetic gains from
Tree improvement are (a) afforestation by SS seeds is
2 % (b) By SPA seeds is 5 % (c) by CSO seeds is 15 %
and (d) by advance generation seed orchards is 25 %.
These gains although look marginal are substantial
when considered in the context of overall growth and
annual yield of heartwood and sandalwood oil
content (Srimathi, et. al., 1995)*.

samples as well as from the wood disk portion
due to similar colour pattern. A colour tests
method was developed for differentiating
sapwood and heartwood (Fig. 2). The sapwood
width was considered as an important parameter
for selection of plus trees. Out of 20 reagents
tried, four colour tests viz. Vanillin – HCl,
Benedict’s solution, HCl – Methanol solution and
Bromocresol Green were effective. When core
sample were treated with Vanillin – HCl
solution, a sharp pink ring was observed at the
heartwood and sapwood boundary area thus
clearly demarcating the sapwood and heartwood
portions clearly (Kulkarni, 2004).

Methods developed and perfected for plus
tree selection,
1) A simple method of using Pressler’s increment
borer on live sandalwood trees for heartwood
estimation was evolved and operation
standardized. A new term was coined “CORE
GRAM” to compare cores derived from various
sandalwood trees with respect to sapwood width
and heartwood colour. Earlier, only 2 to 3
samples per day use to be taken and the person
operating the increment borer was to apply his
might and use to get exhausted. With the rope
technique per day more than 50 core samples
were taken. This rope technique helped in quick
assessment of sandalwood population for
heartwood and oil and the person operating the
increment borer was not tired/exhausted
(Kulkarni, et. al., 1995)*.

4) For multiplication of plus trees and allied
germplasm, cleft grafting method was adopted.
The success rate achieved was 75%. This was the
only method which came handy for
multiplication of the elite germplasm while,
other methods such as air layering (gutti),
rooting of stem cuttings, tissue culture etc., did
not give the required success rate. Propagation
through root suckers however was easy but the
rate of multiplication was very low. Graft
incompatibility was recorded and methods to
overcome such maladies were evolved. A case of
total sterility in sandalwood was first time
reported and vegetative propagation through
grafting was successfully attempted (Srimathi, et.
al., 1995)*.

2) A simple method (Micro-method) for estimation
of sandalwood oil in small quantity (1gr.) of
material through extract-oil correlationship was
developed. Core samples were used for
estimation of sandalwood oil for selection of plus
trees (Shankaranarayana, et. al., 1995).

5) A computerized permutated neighborhood
design with single and double ring isolation was
developed to achieve panmixis in clonal or
seedling seed orchard (Sekar, et. al., 1984).

3) Some time it becomes difficult to differentiate the
sapwood and heartwood portion from the core
6) Preliminary studies on the effect of gamma
irradiation on sandalwood seeds revealed the
51
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
LD50 dosage is at 30 Kr at 6% moisture level in seeds.
Mutants such as chlorine, xantha and albina were
observed in seedlings obtained from irradiated seeds
apart from linear curved leaves, bifurcated stems
etc., (Srimathi, et. al., 1995)*.

(Srimathi, et. al., 1995)*.
2). Pinhole variety (Pitted variety): Occurrence
of pin hole variety (Fig. 3) on an average was 5% in
any given population. The pinholes were found on
the entire tree (root, stem and branches). The
concentration of pinholes ranged from 5 to 28% per
100 cm2. Anatomical studies revealed that the pin
holes are due to presence of giant multi-seriate
medullary rays (256 to 965 μm in length and 57.6 to
266 μm in width). Normally uni and bi-seriate
medullary rays (68.5 to 428.4 μm in length and 15 to
35.78 μm in width) are commonly seen in
sandalwood while, occurrence of multi-seriate
medullary rays is a new report for sandalwood.

Hybridization and Mutation breeding is
considered as the last resort in sandalwood tree
breeding as the best Indian germplasm of
sandalwood if cross breed with other Australian
and pacific sandalwood species (which are
inferior in heartwood and oil content) will lead to
dilution of high quality germplasm.

Genetic variation in half-sib progeny
seedlings of sandalwood plus trees
Other stem forms such as twisted (spiral grain),
stem with prominent and persistent branch knots,
crooked stem were also observed and nearly 3% such
trees occurred in any given population. These
characters were considered as negative characters
and such trees were discarded during plus tree
selection. Sandalwood timber is seldom entirely free
from defects which affect the strength, durability,
colour and economic value. Most of the wood
characters mentioned above are heritable and use of
seeds and clonal material devoid of such defects is
suggested for raising quality plantations (Kulkarni,
2004).

The seed and seedling characteristics belonging to
24 plus trees of sandalwood revealed significant
genetic differences. Seedling characters like long
hypocotyl, root and shoot length, number of
haustoria and leaves associated with 1000 seed
weight contributed to genetically vigorous
seedlings. High heritability (H) estimates associated
with high Genetic advance (GA) were recorded for
1000 seed weight, germination per cent, hypocotyl
and shoot length. While, hypocotyl diameter,
number of haustoria, and leaves showed low
heritability. The D2 analysis of 24 plus trees derived
from diverse populations congregated only in 2
clusters implying that the genetic diversity is more
intrinsic than due to geographical reasons. Based on
varietal indices plus trees KL-3, KL-2, KL-1, K-5, K-7
and TN-25 were shortlisted for further breeding
programme (Kulkarni, et. al., 1998).

3). Thindlu variety: This variety was
characterized by small diameter class (4 to 8 cm DBH)
with brown bark in irregular flakes. The most
distinguishable character is that the sapwood width
is very narrow (2 to 10 mm). The heartwood is dark
brown in colour with distinct annual rings. The
sandalwood oil content is around 2.5% with 85%
santalol content. This variety was first found in
Thindlu reserve of Hoskote range of Bangalore
division and later in Ammenkatte of Hassan division
of Karnataka. This variety was also observed in Bhor
in Maharashtra and Valliyur of Tamil Nadu. For insitu conservation of Thindlu variety, an area of 10 ha
was fenced with chain link mesh in Thindlu forests of
Hoskote range, Bangalore division.

Varieties in Sandalwood
1). Anchety variety of sandalwood: This variety
of sandalwood was growing in Anchety Forest Rest
House, Hosur Division, Tamil Nadu. This tree had 51
cm Girth and 6 m height. The fruit shape was very
different compared to normal sandalwood trees.
This tree showed graft incompatibility suggesting
that it is a different germplasm. Seedlings were
raised from this tree and then cleft grafted to
overcome graft incompatibility. This variety was
multiplied successfully in large numbers to be
planted in germplasm bank and clonal seed orchards
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
4). Chickballapur variety: This variety is
characterized by the presence of small bluish green
leaves with sparse crown. This variety may
correspond to the Noganur variety described by
Griffith in 1937.

52
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
5). Robust variety: This variety usually have a
compact crown with lush green foliage. The stem is
usually straight and cylindrical with rust brown
bark. The sapwood width is wide (around 5 cms).
This variety is considered as a fast growing
sandalwood type in even aged plantations (Srimathi,
et. al., 1983).

A unique Homoplastic (Multiple) grafts was
made on a well grown 4 year old sandalwood plant
with 1.5 m height maintained in a pot (Fig. 4). Cleft
grafts were made deriving the scion material from
ovate, elliptic, lanceolate and linear leaf types with
green and copper coloured leaf. Even after 2 years of
making grafts, the ten types maintained their identity
and survived. Lanceolate green type showed 77.8%
success while, Linear red showed 16.7% success.
This experiment confirms the interspecific varieties
in sandalwood as the grafts maintained their clonal
identity (Kulkarni, 1995).

6). Other types based on leaf shape and size:
Ovate type (Ovata): This is a normal type found in
most of the sandalwood populations with the
average length/breadth ratio of 2.3.
Lanceolate type (Lanceolata): The length of leaf is
4 to 6 times more than the breadth. The average
length/breadth ratio is 3.

Sandalwood and horticulture
Sandalwood besides its traditional usage in
cosmetics, perfumery and handicrafts industry can
be used as a horti-silviculture species. Sandalwood
with variegated leaves (greenish leaves with yellow
patches, Pinkish / copper coloured foliage) leaves
are horticultural novelty. Sandalwood responds to
topiary and is grown in gardens (Srimathi, et. al.,
1995).

Elliptic type (Elliptica): The length of leaf is twice
its breadth. The length/breadth ratio is 1.71.
Linear type (Linerata): The leaf is characterized by
parallel long margins. The leaf length is 8 times more
than the width. The length/breadth ratio is 5.15.
The leaf size is big (Macrophylla) and small
(Microphylla) and these two types are associated
with the above leaf shape types (Kulkarni, 1995).

Sandalwood bark with chemo-sterilant
properties
Homoplastic and Natural grafts
Natural stem grafts in sandalwood were observed
in Valparai, Sholapuram and Chitteri hills in Tamil
Nadu and Cubbon Park in Bangalore, Karnataka.
Such type of grafts were technically termed as
“Natural Approach Grafts” and the natural root
grafts in sandalwood were more common (Kulkarni
and Srimathi, 1985).

A chemo-sterilant compound “triterpene palmitic
ester” was isolated from sandalwood bark which
was proposed to be used as a third generation
pesticide in controlling insect pests on forest plants
(Shankarnarayana, et. al., 1995).

S. No. Sandalwood Leaf type
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ovate, big, red
Ovate, small, red
Ovate, small, green
Elliptic, green
Lanceolate, red
Lanceolate, green
Linear, red
Linear, green
Pendulous
Grafts made
6
6
9
9
9
9
12
11
07
53
Number of
Grafts established
4
2
5
4
6
7
2
3
3
Graft success
(%)
66.70
33.30
55.50
44.40
66.70
77.80
16.70
27.30
42.90
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Future research work:
It was a happy moment that both Mr. K. R.
Venkatesan IFS and Mrs. R. A. Srimathi were
felicitated for their noble contributions on
sandalwood research conducted during 1977 –
1985 period in the sandal seminar held on 19th
December 1997 and 2nd March 2014 respectively
organized by IWST (ICFRE) and Karnataka
Forest Department at Bangalore.

1. It is quite essential now to conduct sandalwood
survey in order to record the spread of sandalwood
in natural forests as well as on private lands /
private plantations as the survey conducted is
more than 40 years old. The survey should include
parameters for heartwood and oil content, pest and
diseases, delineation of provenances and selection
of plus trees.
2. Multi-locational provenance trials and clonal trials.

8. Control of heartwood borer Aristobia octofasciculata
Auruvillius a silent robber of precious heartwood of
sandalwood.

3. Clonal propagation through stem cuttings and
standardization of macro-propagation protocol.
Research on macropropagation is to be undertaken
and protocol developed / standardized which will
pave the way for raising quality and high
productive sandalwood clonal plantations like
poplar and eucalyptus. This technique has the
potential to totally change the scenario on
sandalwood cultivation.

9. Breeding resistant varieties against spike disease
and heartwood borer.
Short term projects such as delineation of
provenances and their trials, clonal propagation (stem
cuttings / tissue culture), cytogenetics and
sandalwood survey should be pursued vigorously.
While, for long term projects a sound research
foundation be laid.

4. Standardization of hardening process of tissue
cultured sandalwood plants and their field trials.

I wish to conclude with a quotation from J. M.
Lydgate of Hawaii “Sandalwood trees have grown in
the past, why should they not grow in the future, if
they are only spared and protected! What nature has
produced so willingly, may she not be persuaded to
produce again with a little intelligent help”. Now that
the farming community has taken up sandalwood
cultivation in India, it builds optimism on the revival
of sandalwood wealth so that its availability is made
on continuous and sustainable basis to everyone.

5. Karyomorphological (Cytogenetics) studies on
sandalwood species / varieties and
biosystematics.
6. Release of sandalwood varieties and varietal
descriptors.
7. Fresh studies on spike disease transmission and
fixing the correct vector for transmission involving
modern methods.

Acknowledgments
Thanks are due to Shri. Chennegiaiah grafter and his team who relentlessly worked for multiplication of elite
germplasm and establishment of orchards. Thanks are also due to Range Forest officers, Foresters, scientists and
technical staff of SRC who made the Tree improvement program a great success. Author is also grateful to Forest
officials of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh who contributed a lot on sandalwood tree
improvement.

References
Kulkarni, H. D. (1995). Studies on Variations and tree improvement aspects of Sandalwood, Santalum album L.
Ph. D. Thesis. Univ. of Mysore. Mysore.
Kulkarni, H. D. (2004). Structural variability in wood of Sandal, Santalum album L. J. Ind. Acad. Wood Sci. (N.S.). 1
(1 & 2): 73-82.
Kulkarni, H. D. (2004). Colour tests for differentiating sapwood and heartwood in Sandal, Santalum album L. An
important parameter for selection of plus trees. J. Ind. Acad. Wood Sci. (N.S.) 1. (1 & 2): 67-72.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
54
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Kulkarni, H. D. and Muniyamma, M. (1998). Planting pattern and host parasite interactions in Santalum album L.
(Sandal) plantations. In: Kikkawa, J. et. al. (Ed). Overcoming impediments to reforestation: Tropical forest
rehabilitation in the Asia-Pacific region. Proceedings of the 6th International workshop of BIO-REFOR.
Brisbane. Australia. 2-5 Dec 1997. BIO-REFOR Publication. University of Queensland. Brisbane. Australia.
Kulkarni, H. D. and Muniyamma, M. (1998). Floral biology and breeding systems in Sandal Santalum album L. J.
Tropical Forestry. 14 (2): 87-102.
Kulkarni, H. D., Muniyamma, M., Srimathi, R. A. and Venkatesan, K. R. (1999). Phenological studies in Santalum
album L. Myforest. 35 (1): 25-46.
Kulkarni, H. D., Rao, S. K. and Muniyamma (1998). Genetic variation in half-sib progeny seedlings of Santalum
album L. (Sandal) plus trees. Seventh All India conference on cytology and genetics and symposium on
molecular genetics and biotechnology (26-28, Oct 1998). Society of Cytologist and Geneticists, India.
Gulbarga University, Gulbarga. Karnataka, India. PCG29 (P).
Kulkarni, H. D. and Srimathi, R. A. (1985). Natural grafts in Sandal. Ind. J. For. 8 (2): 153-154.
Sekar, S., Srimathi, R. A., Kulkarni, H. D. and Venkatesan, K. R. (1984). Computerized design for tree seed
orchards. Ind. J. For. 7 (3): 256.
Srimathi, R. A., Kulkarni, H. D. and Venkatesan, K. R. (1983). Phenotypes of Sandal (Santalum album L.). J. Bombay
Nat. Hist. Soc. 80 (1): 245-246.
Srimathi, R. A., Kulkarni, H. D. and Venkatesan, K. R. (1995). Recent advances in research and management of
sandal (Santalum album L.) in India.

Fig. 1. Grafted clonal seed orchard of sandal, Nallal, Bangalore.
A. Ramet of Clone K-5. and B. Ramet of Clone T-1.

55
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Fig. 2. Colour tests for differentiating sapwood and
heartwood in sandal
A- 1. Full sapwood sample.
2. Sapwood and heartwood zones
3 & 4. Sapwood and heartwood boundary not clear
B. 1. Ferric chloride
2. Hydrochloric acid-methanol
3. Iodine
4. Methyl orange
5. Perchloric acid
6. Benzidine
7. Fehling’s solution
8. Benedicts solution
9. Potassium Iodide-Iodine
10. Vanillin-Hydrochloric acid
11. Bromocresol green
12. Bromophenol blue
13. Phosphomolybdic acid ethnol-HCl
14. MAULE test (KMnO4 HCl NH4OH)
15. Sudan IV
Fig. 3. Anatomy of Pin hole variety of sandalwood A. Biseriate medullary rays B. Multiseriate medullary rays
C. Sandal billet with pin holes
Fig. 4. Homoplastic grafts
of Leaf biotypes in sandal.
1. Ovate red
2. Lanceolate red
3. Linear green
4. Lanceolate green
5. Elliptic green
6. Pendulous type
7. Normal ovate green
(stock plant with Pongamia
host plant)
56
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood - Seed handling and Propagation
Introduction
A
sandalwood plants are
produced through
seeds. Seeds are easy to
propagate. In nature, sandalwood
seed are dispersed through bird
droppings and germination occur
easily when it gets a favourable
environment viz. good soil and
good rainfall. Germination that
occurs naturally is called as
regeneration. All the seeds
germinated do not survive unless
otherwise it gets continuous good
environment in the initial period.
Though many seeds germinate,
only few seedlings become tree in
nature. Production of seedling of
sandalwood in more quantity is
required to meet the demand of
public to raise plantations. This
article deals about the sandalwood
fruit, its maturation, collection and
raising of seedlings in nursery. This
knowledge is very much essential
to produce seedlings in large
quantity.

Sandalwood flowering and
Fruiting:
Flowering in Sandalwood trees
occurs twice in a year. It starts
flowering during February to
March and during the month of
July to August. Fruits mature after
90-110 days. Mature fruits are
N. Ravi,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology,
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru.

available during May to June and September to November. Mature
fruits can easily be identified by the colour of the fruits. The colour of the
fruit is dark pinkish in colour.
Flowering in Sandalwood trees occurs twice in a year. It starts flowering
during February to March and during the month of July to August.
Fruits mature after 90-110 days. Mature fruits are available during May
to June and September to November. Mature fruits can easily be
identified by the colour of the fruits. The colour of the fruit is dark
pinkish in colour.

Collection of fruits and processing of Seed:
The fruit size
varies resulting
in 4000 to 6000
seeds for one
kilogram.
Mature fruits
either fall on the
ground or stick
to inflorescence
and dry up. These fruits can be handpicked from the tree or collected
from the ground. Fruits should be collected from the ground regularly.
Allowing the fruits to stay on the ground for long time leads to insect
attack in fruits, which affect germination.
The collected fruits should be processed by soaking in water for 6-8
hours and the fruit coat removed manually by rolling the fruits with
hand and regularly adding water to remove the fruit coat.
Clean seeds are obtained by repeated cleaning of fruit, twice
or thrice by the above mentioned procedure. The cleaned
seeds are dried under sunlight for one or two days to remove
excess water. It is then stored at room temperature in a cloth
bag. Seeds can be stored for two to three months.
The quality of seeds can be tested by three methods; by
floatation
test wherein
seeds are soaked in
water and the floating
seeds can be rejected; by
germination test
wherein seeds
Fruit de-pulping
Seed drying
representing the lot can
57
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
be sown and percentage germination can be
obtained; by cutting test wherein seeds are cut to
observe the presence of healthy embryo.

Raising of Seedlings:
Preparation of Nursery bed: The ideal nursery
bed size for large quantity of seedling production is
10 (L) x 1 (w) metre. All sides of the bed need to be
arranged with single line of bricks with a height of 4-5
bricks (16 to 20 inches height). The bottom of the bed
has to be filled with 2 to 3 layer of gravels (size 20
mm) for easy percolation of excess water. Above the
gravel, river sand has to be spread for about 6 to 9
inches height.

Bottom layer
with gravel
Bricks for
preparation of bed
Elevated bed
takes upto150 days. If the seeds are treated with GA3
(Gibberellic acid), they start germinating after 20
days and completes within 60 days.
Treating the seed with GA3: 500 ppm of
gibberellic acid solution is prepared by dissolving
1 g of gibberellic acid in 2 litres of water. Initially,
gibberellic acid solution has to be dissolved in 5 to
10 ml of 40 to 50% alcohol. Once Gibberellic acid is
completely dissolved in alcohol, water is added to
prepare two litre of solution. Seeds should be
soaked in GA3before sowing in bed.

Filling with Sand
Watering of nursery bed and Germination:
Watering has to be done twice in a day using flower
Elevated bed: In elevated
type of bed bricks are not
used as lining for the bed
instead a heap of sand is
made to a certain height and
then the top of the heap is
levelled. Sowing can be
done on the flat top of the
elevated bed.

Medium for sandalwood seed growing: Sand is
found to be the best media for sandalwood seed
germination and temperature of 25˚ to 30˚c is found
to be ideal.

pot from the day of sowing the seeds.
Germination of seeds and transplantation of
seedling: Seeds start germinating from 20 days after
sowing. Once the seedlings reach the stage of 2-4
leaves (30-40 days after germination) they are ready
for transplantation. If seeds are sown in December
then transplanting is done in January which can be
extended upto February. Transplanting in the
afternoon hours is preferred. The transplantation is
completed by evening then transplants are not
Management of bed: Thimmet 10G granules
@500gm/bed of 1X 10mt can be added along with the
bed mixture. Watering has to be done twice daily
based on moisture content of the bed. In case of
fungal infection spraying of Bavisitin 0.01% is
advised.
Preparation of seed for sowing: Germination of
sandalwood seed starts at 45 days after sowing and
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Sowing of seeds: These GA3 soaked seeds are
spread on the nursery bed, leaving spaces
between seeds and later covered with thin layer of
sandalwood seed. Seeds should not be sown
closely.

58
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
exposed to harsh sunlight and higher temperature.
Transplanting care should be taken to avoid root
coiling. Transplanted seedlings are kept in shade for
about 5-6 days to avoid transplanting shock. They
can be exposed gradually to sunlight for hardening
the seedlings. Transplantation is done in polythene
bag or root trainer filled with potting mixture.

Root trainers provide proper aeration for the roots
and the ridges present on root trainer train the root
in proper direction thus robust root system is
Potting mixture: Potting mixture is the media for
planting of transplants. Potting mixture for polybags
or root trainer can be prepared by mixing Sand, Soil,
Compost, Burnt rice husk and charcoal (optional) in
the ratio 25:15:50:5:5. or Sand soil and compost in
35:15:50 ratio can also be preferred.
Seedlings transplanted into Root trainer
Polybag or root trainer: Transplants can be raised
Seedlings transplanted into Polybgas
Preparation
of potting
mixture
either in polybags
or in root
trainer.
Polybags of size 5
x 8 inches are preferred as optimum size for
sandalwood transplants to maintain them for 9
months. Bigger size polythene bags can be used if the
seedlings are to be retained for more than one year.
For mass propagation 270cc block type root trainers
are recommended with density of 160-200 cell/sq mt.

Poly Bags
Sandalwood with Cajanus cajan as host
Root Trainer
59
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
produced.

Season of nursery: Establishing nursery during
right season helps the plant to grow healthily when
they are in nursery bags.

Providing of Host plant: As Sandalwood is a
partial root parasite it should be provided with
suitable host. Touch me not plant (Mimosa pudica) or
Pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan) can be provided as host
plant immediately after transplanting. These host
plants have to plant 7 to 10- days after transplanting
the sandalwood seedling. Mimosa pudica is
propogated easily by cuttings. It can be grown along
with the sandalwood plant by inserting a small stem
cutting near to the sandalwood plant. In case of
Cajanus cajan, one or two seeds need to be sown near
the plant.

Source of seed: Seed should be collected from
known sources which means trees from seed
orchards or from plantations maintained for seed
collection with broader genetic base should be
chosen for seed collection.
Stage of transplanting: Transplanting should be
when the seedling are in 2-4 leaves stage delay in
transplanting beyond 2-4 leaves stage allows the
plant for its shoot and root growth which may lead to
damage to roots while transplanting or difficulty in
transplanting seedlings with lengthy root.

Host management: Pruning of Mimosa pudica
should be carried out at 30 days interval and Cajanus
cajan at 15 days interval to avoid overgrowth of the
host.

Type of container: Polybag/root trainer: Root
trainers provide proper aeration for the roots and the
ridges present on root trainer train the root in proper
direction thus robust root system is produced. Root
pruning is easy in root trainer.

Nutrition supplements: Spraying of NPK soluble
solid fertilizers at 0.5% along with multiplex of 0.25%
can be followed for 15 days interval if required.
Application of vermicompost (5- 10 g) in polythene
bag once in 45 days, will boost the growth of the
plant.

Size of container: volume of the container: It is
important to choose the container with proper size
depending on how long the seedlings are retained in
nursery before planting in the field.

Supplementary nutrition: Osmocote slow release
fertilizer 0.25g/ seedling can be provided (if N status
of potting mixture is 1-1.5%). Osmocote slow release
fertilizer 0.50g/ seedling can be provided (if N status
of potting mixture is low)
Nutrition: The health of the plant needs to be
monitored regularly and additional nutrition should
be provided to maintain good growth of the
seedlings.
Host and pest management: Seedlings should be
observed regularly for attack of insect/pest. In case
of attack, treating with insecticides/pesticides
should be followed for obtaining quality seedlings.

Pest and disease management: Bavistin (Wettable
powder) @0.25% and Ekalux 0.1% can be applied at
fortnight intervals in case of fungal and pest attack
respectively.

Factors affecting quality of seedlings:
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
60
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Tissue Culture of the Scented Tree,
Santalum album L.
Introduction
S
Almas Khannam and Tresa Hamalton,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology,
Malleswaram, Bengaluru.

antalum album L., commonly
known as Sandalwood or
Chandan is being generally
propagated through seeds.
However, due to its out-breeding
nature, the seed based progenies
are highly variable. While
vegetative propagation through
grafting and root suckers is less
successful for S. album,
micropropagation can aid in longterm conservation and clonal
propagation of valuable
germplasm. In vitro cloning is the
only method for rapid and mass
production of clonal planting
material. In order to exploit the full
worth of superior clones containing
high oil content or heartwood,
researchers have invented tissue
culture techniques for mass
propagation of sandalwood.
Various factors like type of explant
used, season of explant collection,
nutrient medium, plant growth
regulators & other additives
incorporated in the medium,
incubation conditions, and
duration of sub culturing, play an
important role in the success of in
vitro propagation of any plant
species. IWST, Bangalore has
developed micropropagation
protocols for S. album through
axillary shoot induction from
nodes, adventitious shoot
induction from leaf and somatic
embryogenesis from callus.

During 1997 Sanjay a first established the tissue cultured sandalwood
cultures at IWST for three selected clones by collecting explants from
established germplasm banks. Success in shoot induction in explants
from mature trees of sandalwood has been reported by Sanjay et al. in
1998.Later in 2002 and 2003, Mamatha and Biniya established in vitro
cultures for four other promising genotypes. Sanjaya et al. (2006) and
Rathore et al. (2008) observed multiple shoot induction from nodal shoot
segments derived from mature tree on MS medium with additives, IAA
and BAP. Low rate of rooting on MS/4 medium with IBA was also
observed. Biniya (2007) studied the effect of media, PGR’s, additives,
genotypes and polyamines on in vitro shoot multiplication in S. album
and reported that MS medium with NAA, BAP and additives favoured
shoot multiplication. Joshi (2012) and Sushant (2020) studied the in vitro
and ex vitro rooting, as well as hardening in sandalwood; the latter also
studied the effect of bio-fertilizers on tissue culture raised S. album
plantlets at nursery stage.

Axillary shoot proliferation
Somatic embryogenesis
The axillary bud is an embryonic
shoot which lies at the junction of the stem and petiole of a plant. These
axillary buds are usually dormant, inhibited by auxin produced by the
apical meristem, which is known as apical dominance. Nowadays,
axillary shoot proliferation has become more popular in commercial
micropropagation. The main reason is that it isthe most reliable method
of propagation, producing direct shoots and avoiding the risk of genetic
variation, thereby guaranteeing clonal
stability. Although the rate of
multiplication is generally less than
that which can be brought about
through shoot culture, there is less
likelihood of associated callus
development or the formation of
adventitious shoots, so that
subculture carries very little risk of
Axillary shoot initiation from
induced genetic irregularity. For this
nodes of sandalwood
reason, axillary shoot culture has been
increasingly recommended by research workers as the most appropriate
micropropagation method.

Somatic embryogenesis is defined as a process in which a bipolar
61
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
structure resembling a zygotic embryo develops
from a non-zygotic cell, without vascular connection
with the original tissue. Somatic embryogenesis
occurs through a series of stages characteristic of
zygotic embryogenesis. Somatic embryos can
differentiate either directly from the explant without
an intervening callus phase or indirectly after a callus
phase. The mass propagation of plants through
multiplication of embryogenic propagules is the
most commercially attractive application of somatic
embryogenesis. In addition, it permits the culture of
large number of
reproductive units,
and plants derived
from somatic
embryos are less
variable than those
derived by the way of
organogenesis.

multiplied and
rooted, before
acclimatisation
.

In-Vitro
rooting
The rate of
shoot
multiplication
and frequency
of rooting
Adventitious shoot regeneration
have a direct
from leaves of S. album
impacton the
application of
a micropropagation protocol for mass production.
It is easy to induce rooting from the shoots of
seedling origin, but quite often frequency of rooting
reduces with increase in age of the source plants
particularly in tree species. Rooting frequency also
depends on the level of rejuvenation during
multiplication stage and quality of the shoots.
Nutrient media, auxin source and their
concentration and incubation conditions play an
important role in the frequency of rooting, root
number, root length and shoot length. Apart from
these, the other factors like Carbon source,
Coumarin and Polyamines also play a major role in
adventitious rooting in sandalwood.

Bapat & Rao (1984)
and Rathore et al.
(2008) reported
Somatic embryos of
embryogenic callus
Santalum album
induction in S. album
from the leaf
segments obtained from multiple shoot culture of
mature trees on MS medium with additives and 2,4D.Though initial growth of callus was slow, from the
second subculturing onward fragile and soft
embryogenic callus was produced which required
subculturing on fresh medium within four weeks
period. Maturation and germination of the somatic
embryos in appropriate media gives rise to whole
plantlets which can then be hardened.

In S. album, Sanjaya et al. (2006) used various
auxins and found that micro shoots treated with
IBA for 48 hr followed by subculturing on MS/4
agar gelled medium with 2% sucrose favoured
maximum rooting of 41.6%. In vitro rooting was
also observed by the pulse treatment of shoots with
IBA for 30min followed by planting in soilrite
medium; but this
method too
resulted in no
more than 50%
rooting. Rathore
et al. (2008) also
used various
auxins either
alone or in
combination in
MS/4 medium,
In vitro roots induced in
and found that
Adventitious shoot regeneration
Adventitious shoot regeneration is the direct
organogenesis of shoots from adventitious plant parts
like leaves and internodes lacking meristematic cells.
This is an efficient and reliable technique of plant tissue
culture, unless it fails in the regeneration of shoots
from cells and tissues which is a hurdle in its
application for the regeneration of forest species.
Rathore et al. (2008) and Sushant (2020) reported direct
adventitious shoot formation from explant of mature
sandalwood tree with pulse treatment of leaf segment
using TDZ in MS liquid medium for a week, followed
by transfer to hormone-free MS medium with
additives. The shoots thus regenerated can be further
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
sandalwood shoots
62
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
combined use of IAA and IBA proved to be the best
for in vitro rooting. They also reported rooting
from microshoots which were pulse treated with
IBA, but the rooting
attention was paid to understand the process of
acclimatisation of micropropagated plants to the
soil environment. Consequently, the
transplantation stage continues to be a major
bottleneck in the micropropagation of sandalwood.

frequency varied with the genotypes.

In S. album, hardening is very important and it is
difficult also
because of its
hemi root
parasitic
nature. In
vitro rooting
of
micropropag
ated shoots
and somatic
embryogenes
Primary hardening of
is resulted in
S. album in soil rite
the formation
of single
root, because of which direct hardening in potting
medium is very difficult combined with initialcollar
rotting. Hence, IWST has worked on the two stage
hardening method i.e., primary and secondary
hardening techniques, by using different media in
combinations for potting mixture preparation and
in different growth conditions.

Ex Vitro rooting
Ex vitro rooting reduces one step of in vitro
rooting, thereby reducing the cost of production and
also improves the survival rate of plantlets. It also
helps to save time required for getting the plantlets
through time consuming in vitro rooting technique
from lab to field. To avoid the hurdle of hardening,
most of the time the in vitro propagated shoots are
directly treated with auxins (alone or in combination)
to encourage rooting of the shoots in ex vitro
conditions. In that way the crucial step of in vitro
rooting and hardening of the plantlets are merged,
and we can get ex vitro rooting while the plantlets are
also partially acclimatised to the outside
environment which will result in better survival rate
in the field condition. Auxin type, its concentration
and duration of treatment, rooting medium and
incubation conditions are the factors which influence
ex vitro rooting. Goyal (2007) and Sushant (2020)
reported that maximum ex vitro rooting was obtained
in soilrite and vermiculite medium when
micropropagated shoots of S. album were pulse
treated with different concentrations of IBA.

Field establishment of micro propagated
plants
Hardening and acclimatisation
The ultimate success of any micropropagation
technique relies on the survival of the plantlets in
field conditions. The transition from in vitro to an ex
vitro environment is one of the most important and
critical steps in the field performance of tissue culture
raised plants after hardening, which is measured by
its survival in soil. Poor survival of a plant under ex
vitro conditions is mainly due to poor development
of cuticular waxes, non-functional stomata, water
loss due to excessive transpiration, poor root system
and susceptibility to pathogens.

The success of micropropagation on commercial
scale depends on the ability to transfer plants from
lab to land on a large scale, at low cost and high
survival rates. Micropropagated plants under in
vitro condition are partially autotroph, lack cuticle
and waxy layer on the leaf surface. In addition,
stomata are not fully functional, and sometimes the
roots are weak or brittle. This heterotrophic mode of
nutrition and poor mechanism to control water loss
render micropropagated plants vulnerable to
transplantation shocks and wilting of plants.
Therefore, hardening or acclimatisation is essential
before keeping them in open nursery. Hardening
conditions and duration may vary with the species
for its high rate of survival. Although, considerable
efforts have been directed to optimise the conditions
for the in vitro stages of micropropagation, scant
S. album trees out of test tube
The following work has been carried out by other
research institutes or organizations in India, using
biotechnological approaches in the production of
quality planting material of sandalwood:
63
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
S. Organisation conducting
No. research in Tissue culture
1. Delhi University; IISc, Bangalore
Endosperm culture
2.

BARC, Mumbai; IISc, Bangalore;
Cell suspension culture and somatic embryogenesis
Hamdard University, New Delhi
from seedling explants
3.

BARC, Mumbai
Protoplast culture and regeneration of plants
from seedling explant
4.

BARC, Mumbai; IIT- Kharagpur
Application of bioreactor for production of somatic
embryos and synthetic seed. Secondary metabolite
production using bioreactor and somatic embryogenesis
5.

IWST, Bangalore
In vitro cloning (micro propagation) of
sandalwood from mature trees/clones/plus trees
6.

IWST, Bangalore
Somatic embryogenesis from mature trees/
clones/plus trees
7.

IWST, Bangalore
Evaluation of genetic fidelity of micropropagated plants
through axillary shoot proliferation and somatic
embryogenesis
8.

RVS Agricultural University,
Gwalior; JNAU, Jabalpur
Somatic embryogenesis using suspension cultures
9.

Anand Agricultural University;
IWST, Bangalore
Plant regeneration from leaf explants
10. RVS and RVSKVV Agricultural University,
Gwalior; TNAU- Mettupalayam; Centre for
Pacific crops and Trees (CePaCT)
Technique employed
In vitro cloning of sandalwood
Unlike with herbaceous plants, culturing trees in a
test tube poses significant challenges. It is not feasible
to assess quality in a short time. Tissue culture
studies in sandalwood are mainly confined to
regeneration from seedling explants or somatic
embryogenesis through callus with low germination
frequency (Rao and Bapat, 1978; Lakshmi Sita et al,
1979). Success is restricted to R&D level for
production of clonal planting material from mature
and superior genotypes through micropropagation.
The hardening of micropropagated plantlets of
sandalwood is still a bottleneck in its large scale
production. Since trees take a long time to mature,
establishing the tissue cultured plants of sandalwood
into soil is a delicate process. In order to meet the
growing need of sandalwood at the national and
international markets, there is an urgent need to
carry out studies on the critical factors for successful
establishment of tissue cultured plants in the field.
Therefore, IWST has taken up studies for field trials
of micropropagated plants of selected promising
sandalwood genotypes under an All-India
coordinated project on sandalwood.

Conclusion
Trees are generally slow growing, and the same slow growth is observed during in vitro culturing also. Hence,
each step in the micropropagation protocol for sandalwood takes more time as compared to fast growing plants
like bamboos. Obtaining maximum response without casualties, starting from aseptic culture establishment to
the production of hardened plants ready for transplanting, is yet to be achieved in sandalwood. This is another
obstacle in the large scale production of quality planting material of sandalwood through tissue culture. The
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
64
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
present research is directed towards overcoming this, and protocols developed by IWST, Bangalore can be used
for the large scale production of clonal planting material of desirable clones for mass plantation. Till date there is
no production of elite material of sandalwood through tissue culture. Even though various companies or
nurseries claim that they are producing and selling tissue culture raised sandalwood plants, their origin might
not be from superior genotype selected for high oil yield or heartwood content. Since research at IWST is focused
on developing protocols for selected promising genotypes with field trials, quality planting material of
sandalwood raised using in vitro techniques can be outsourced to various cultivators, nurseries, farmers, general
public etc. in the near future.

Suggested reading
1
Bapat, V. A. and Rao, P. S. 1984. Regulatory factors for in vitro multiplication of sandalwood tree (Santalum
album Linn.) I. Shoot bud regeneration and somatic embryogenesis in hypocotyl cultures. Proceedings: Plant
Sciences 93 (1): 19-27.

2
Biniya Goyal. 2007. Studies on in vitro cloning of sandal (Santalum album L.) and red sanders (Pterocarpus
santinulus L.) through axillary shoot proliferation for mass production of high quality planting material of
plus trees, evaluation of genetic fidelity and field performance. PhD Thesis, Forest Research Institute,
Dehradun, India. 193p.

3
Joshi, G and Rathore, T. S. 2012. Studies on scale up of protocols for in vitro propagation, hardening,
production of cloned plants and establishment of field trials of Sandalwood (Santalum album L.). Project
completion report, ICFRE, Dehradun, India. 146p.

4
Mamatha, R. 2007. Studies on somatic embryogenesis for rapid and mass production of high quality
planting material of sandalwood (Santalumalbum L.) and red sanders (Pterocarpus santalinus L.), evaluation
of genetic fidelity and field performance. Ph.D. thesis, FRI (Deemed) University, Dehradun.

5
Rao, P. S. and Bapat, V. A. 1978. Vegetative propagation of sandalwood plants through tissue culture.
Canadian Journal of Botany 56 (9): 1153-1156.

6
Rathore, T. S., Goyal, B., Dubey, A. K. and Rao, P. S. 2008a. In vitro cloning of sandalwood (Santalum album)
through axillary shoot proliferation and evaluation of genetic fidelity. In: Conservation, improvement,
cultivation and management of sandalwood (Santalum album L.), , Gairola, S., Rathore, T. S., Joshi, G.,
Kumar, A. N. and Agarwal, P. K. (eds.), published by the IWST (ICFRE), Bangalore, India, pp. 85-91.

7
Rathore, T. S., Rangaswamy, M., Goyal, B., Dubey, A. K. and Rao, P. S. (2008b). Micropropagation through
axillary shoot proliferation and somatic embryogenesis in sandalwood (Santalum album L.) from mature
trees. In: Forest Biotechnology in India, Ansari, S. A., Narayanan, C. and Mandal, A. K. (eds.), Satish Serial
Publishing House, Delhi, India, pp. 215-218.19.

8
Sanjaya, Ananthapadmanabha, H. S. and Ravishankar Rai, V. 1998. In vivo micrografting of Santalum album
L. shoot tips. In: Sandal and its products, pp.60- 65 Radomiljac, A. M., Ananthapadmanbha, H. S., Welbourn,
R. M. and Rao, K. S. (eds.) ACIAR Proceedings.

9
Sanjaya, Nuthan, B. and Rathore, T. S. 2006. Micropropagation of an endangered Indian sandalwood
(Santalum album L.). Journal of forest research 11 (3): 203- 209.

10
Sita, G. L., Ram, N. R. and Vaidyanathan, C. S. 1979. Differentiation of embryoids and plantlets from shoot
callus of sandalwood. Plant Science Letters 15 (3): 265- 270.

11
Sushant, C. A. 2020. Studies on up-scaling for rapid in vitro propagation, evaluation of genetic fidelity and
establishment of field demonstration trail of Sandalwood (Santalum album L.). Ph.D. thesis, FRI (Deemed)
University, Dehradun.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
65
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Reproductive Phenology and Natural
Regeneration of Indian Sandalwood:
An Ecological Implication
Introduction
I
ndian sandalwood
(Santalum album L.) is one of
the commercial tree species
of genera Santalum. Although it is
indigenous to peninsular India, it is
distributed many parts of the
country which includes Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Gujarat and also in Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar and Manipur states. In many
places it is naturalized and races of
sandalwood population are
showing great variation in terms of
many morphological, growths,
formation of heartwood and oil
content.
Ecology of this species play vital
role in adoption and survival
population in newly introduced
area, since it is semi-root parasite,
which need host plants for their
survival, growth and
establishment. Successful
plantation of sandalwood is mainly
depends upon the healthy &
genetic potential of seedling lots,
availability & performance of host
plants, initial care and periodic
management practices like soil
working, weeding, watering,
application of manure/fertilizer,
etc. Planting sandalwood not only
fulfils the commercial value; but
also paying importance of
ecological services like food/
forage, pollination, dispersion,
carbon sequestration, etc. in the
growing habitat. This paper
Rajesh P. Gunaga*, Hanumantha, M.1, N.S. Thakur,
H.T. Hegde, M.S. Sankanur and R.L. Sondarva,
College of Forestry, Navsari Agricultural University (NAU), Navsari, Gujarat.
1
College of Forestry, UASD, Sirsi Campus, Uttara Kannada, Karnataka.
* Email: rpgunaga@gmail.com
emphasises the importance of life history parameters like reproductive
phenology, plant-animal interaction and natural regeneration in
sandalwood along with artificial regeneration.

Reproductive phenology
From commercial point of view, the knowledge of phenology play a
vital role in the time of seed collection from the forests or plantations.
Foresters and nursery man use to note the fruiting time for large scale
seed collection for raising quality seedlings in the nurseries.
Sandalwood breeder’s point of view, reproductive phenology, in terms
of time and duration of flowering/ peak flowering among individuals
with a population or between genotypes growing in different habitats or
provenances, provide a basic data base about flowering synchrony,
which helps during crossing programme as well as while establishment
of seed orchards for production of genetic quality seed lots.
Commencement of first flowering in sandalwood usually starts from
3-5 years age and full blooming and fruiting starts during 5 to 8 years of
age, depending upon the locality and management practices carried out
during cultivation. Rarely some plants flowers at the early age of sapling
stage. Three out of sixty saplings of sandalwood established in the
Navsari Agricultural University (NAU) campus started flowering at the
age of 10 months (i.e., during Sept. to Oct., 2021). Very few fruits were set
in those plants. These sandalwood plants were established along with
host plants viz., Alternanthera dentata, (Ornamental groundcover plant)
near the sandalwood plant and Acacia mangium hybrid in between two
sandalwood plants.
Flowering pattern is recorded to vary among the natural populations.
Usually, sandalwood trees flowers during February to April (hot
weather) and fruits ripen during May to June and coincide with rainy
season. It is also recorded that some of the sandalwood trees flowers
continuously about eight to ten months with two peaks in flowering (i.e.,
Dec. to Jan. and Jul.to Aug.) and fruiting (Apr. to May and Sept. to Oct.)
in Dharwad condition. Unusual flowering and fruiting in some of the
individuals within a population have also been noticed and such kind
variation may be attributed to the genetic factors.
67
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Natural Regeneration
On other hand, environmental factors also play a
vital role in seasonal
The natural regeneration pattern of sandalwood
in different natural populations/ plantations is
determined by the local habitat environment and
genetic potential of that population. Among tropical
species, the natural regeneration of sandalwood is
found to be good and sometime excellent, depending
upon the natural population. Sandalwood trees are
grown well under partial shade, under canopy and
they need partial shade during early age of seedling
to sapling condition; however, it needs light at the
later stage of tree growth and establishment. Since
sandalwood is semi-parasite (root), they require host
plants for their growth and establishment. Therefore,
successful regeneration is obviously depends upon
the neighbouring plants those really act as host
plants for sandalwood. Natural regeneration of
sandalwood study carried out in the Dharwad region
showed that, out of various ecosystems studied like
natural forest, medicinal plants garden, Bamboo
plantation, Nilgiri plantation, Karanj plantation and
Acacia auriculiformis plantation located within in
the campus, good regeneration was recorded in the
medicinal plants garden, followed by natural forest
and bamboo plantation as compared to plantations
of Nilgiri and Karanj. The possible reason could be
due to presence of more number of sandalwood trees
in these ecosystems, which might have attracted
several bird species during fruiting season;
moreover, bushy plants, scrubs, small trees, hedges
in the medicinal garden and natural forest favours
the birds for dispersal of sandalwood seeds. Since the
seedlings are easily browsed and damaged by cattle
and other animals, protection given to medicinal
plants, natural forests favours the natural
regeneration of sandalwood.

variation in reproductive phenology viz., time of
initiation and length/duration of flowering, as well
as overall fruit yield in many tropical tree species
including sandalwood. It is observed that fluctuation
in fruit yield from one season to other is highly
affected by temperature, rainfall, soil moisture and
relative humidity of that particular season. It is also
reported that fruit set and yield vary from one season
to others, which affects the seed germination and
seedling vigour in sandalwood.
Duration of flowering and fruiting in sandalwood
always helps the insects and birds for food/forage
resources viz., pollen, nectar, flesh-fruit pulp and
seed. In fact, frugivores are highly dependent on the
abundance and nutritional composition of fruits;
further, small seeded fruits are ingested and are
likely to be deposited at greater distances from the
parent tree. Fruits of sandalwood having such
qualities; hence, many birds act as potent dispersal
agents in sandalwood and provide good
regeneration in natural habitat. It is reported that
birds like Koel, Common Myna, Brown-headed
Barbet, White-headed Babbler and other bird species
act as dispersal agent in this species. Other side,
insect visitation and pollination also favours the
cross pollination in sandalwood that also improves
the seed set and genetic quality of seed lots. Insect
visitors like honey bee, butterfly and ants encourages
the pollination in the sandalwood. Activities of
pollinator during flowering season also decide the
overall fruit set and seed yield. Further, spider
visitation to sandalwood flowers in young plantation
was also recorded (see plate). By looking into all
these, Sandalwood, play a great role on ecology and
ecosystem services.

Conclusion
Flowering and fruiting phenology varyat individual level as well as provenance level; in fact two seasons of
flowering and fruiting within a year help the nursery man for large scale seedling production both in on and off
season. Further, such pattern of flowering and fruiting is an advantage for pollinator and frugivores. Both
sandalwood trees and other organisms viz., insects, birds including small mammals, have mutualism in the
sandalwood ecosystem. Hence, they are more fruit set and good pattern of recruits under the forests and
plantations wherever sandalwood trees are distributed
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
68
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Santalum album L. - Root Parasitism: Enigma of
Host-parasite Interaction, and Host selection
Upasana Mohapatra1, Veena S Anil1*, & Chandrashekar K T2,
Department of Plant Biotechnology, UAS, GKVK,
Bengaluru.
2
Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bengaluru.
*Email: veenaanil@ymail.com
1
T
he interactions among plants and their
consumers, pollinators and dispersers are
of paramount importance in the ecosystem
and in evolution, and so are interactions among
plants themselves (Thorpe et al, 2011). The plantplant interactions can be positive or negative, intraplant or inter-plant interaction. Among the negative
interactions, parasitism and the chemical cross talk
between host-parasite is much less studied field and
should be getting more attention by researchers. The
word parasite is derived from two Greek words Para
means beside and sitos means food. Parasitic plants
are characterized by the ability to feed directly on
other plants, invading either the roots or shoots of
their hosts through parasitic structures called
haustoria (Kuijt et al., 1968). Based on the status of
photosynthesis, parasitic plants are hemiparasitic
(photo synthetically competent, though the
efficiency of photosynthesis varies considerably
between different species) and holoparasites (lack of
photosynthetic activity and obtains all their reduced
carbon through haustorial connections with a host)
(Irving and Cameron, 2009).

long term host and permanent host in the field
(Annapurna et al., 2006). The parasitic nature of
sandalwood was reported by John Scott in 1871. The
importance of sandalwood parasitism was realized
after Barber (1902) reported in detail about haustorial
formation, growth and development of haustoria. But
the host selectivity of sandalwood is not yet
understood properly like in other aerial parasites.

Superior hosts for Sandalwood?
In nature, the establishment and survival of
sandalwood trees is entirely dependent on other
woody plants in its vicinity which serve as hosts.
Legume plants seem to act as superior hosts for
Santalum (Radomiljac et al., 1998) indeed, direct
haustorial establishment on root nodules have been
reported (Subbharao et al., 1990). However, some
contrary evidence demonstrated that host N is not
always a reliable predictor of parasite performance
(Jiang etal., 2008).
Nge et al., 2019 studied the host requirement of
Santalum acuminatum (quandong) and found strong
host specificity with Acacia saligna as growth of
quandongs were stronger when they were paired with
Acacia saligna than when grown with other legumes
and non-legumes, indicating that some plants are
better hosts, and implicating host specificity. The best
sandalwood seedling height was attained by the
plants grown with Desmodium triflorum up to the 24th
week and then the plants grown with Mimosa pudica
attained the same height. The best root collar diameter
growth and the highest number of leaf whorls were
produced by the plants grown with M. pudica and D.
triflorum respectively. Control experiment and the
fertliser treatment produced poor results. (Subasinghe
et al., 2011). Das and Tah (2017) conducted experiment
in different soil environment of South West Bengal
both in nursery and field condition after
transplantation of sandalwood saplings with
Problems of Silviculture of sandalwood:
For the plants having high economic value,
sustainability needs to be maintained through the
efforts of regeneration. Production of sandalwood
can be increased by extensive plantation of this
species after properly understanding the host-parasite
relationship, proper production of planting materials
and knowledge of silviculture of this species. Being
hemi – parasite the silvicultural requirements are
unique and there is no adequate understanding of the
same. Its regeneration and establishment have been
problematic because of the poor understanding of host
– parasite relationships. Only a few literatures are
available indicating the relation of host in field grown
sandalwood tree.
This species shows different growth patterns with
different host species. It was also reported that sandal
requires a primary host at nursery stage, secondary
69
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
different hosts singly and in combination of hosts
and found that Arhar (Cajanus cajan) is the best host
followed by Arhar & Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum)
combination followed by Tulsi singly.

characterized class of germination stimulants. At
least 20 different SL molecules identified in plants
and plant families produce varying forms such that
parasite seeds are able to differentiate among hosts
on the basis of the identity of exuded SLs as in case of
parasite Striga.

Deepa and Yusuf, 2015, examined the
morphological and anatomical features together with
biochemical parameters of sandalwood haustoria
developed with roots of five host species from
leguminous (Mimosa pudica L., Clitoria ternatea L.,
Capsicum pubescens Benth. and Arachis glabrata Benth.)
and non-leguminous (Vetiveria zizanioides L. ) plants.
The plants attached with the roots of Mimosa. pudica
showed better growth (total chlorophyll, protein and
carbohydrate content) compared to sandalwood
plants attached with other hosts.

There is a complete lacunae in our understanding of
the biomolecules involved in sandalwood-host
selection and downstream signaling pathways. Earlier
Dr Veena Anil’s work has demonstrated that somatic
embryogenesis in sandalwood was a calcium
regulated process, involving calcium dependent
Protein kinase (Anil and Rao 2001). It is not far-fetched
to assume complex signaling and molecular events
control parasitism of S. album. But no such study has
been conducted so far.

S. album L. growth and heartwood contents of trees
aged 6 years cultivated on farm land in association with
Citrus aurantium, Punica granatum and Casuarina
equisetifolia as host species, were studied to identify the
most suitable host. Survival, height, collar diameter,
crown size and clear bole of S. album trees were greater
when grown with C. aurantium than the other two hosts.

Proper understanding of the host-parasite
relationship, proper production of planting materials
and deeper knowledge of silviculture of sandalwood
are necessary to increase sandalwood plantation in
view of extensive sandalwood production. In this
context we are investigating the variation in the
response of sandalwood towards two different host
plants, Alternanthera (nonlegume) and Cajanus
(Legume). The increment in growth, biomass, and the
chlorophyll content observed in sandalwood with two
hosts compared to the control plant grown without
any host clearly indicates the requirement of a host,
and in this case Cajanas as the better host. The
differences in molecular response towards the two
hosts implicates varied response of sandalwood plant
towards different host plants.

Secondary metabolite signalling in host–parasitic
plant interactions has been studied in several parasitic
weed plants as they are a threat to crop production
(Runyon et al., 2006). Parasitic plant Cuscuta
pentagona (dodder) uses volatile cues for host
location. Cuscuta pentagona seedlings exhibit directed
growth toward nearby tomato plants (Lycopersicon
esculentum) and towards extracted tomato-plant
volatiles present in the absence of other cues (Runyon
et al., 2006). Strigolactones (SLs) are the best-
Conclusion
S. album L, a root hemiparasite, is valued for its heartwood and faces over-exploitation in the forests of Southern
India. Moreover, the cultivation of sandalwood is challenging due to its complex silvicultural requirements.
Among the host species, legume species have been found to better benefit Sandalwood growth, however there
are also reports of non-legumes being effective hosts for S. album. In addition, some observations suggest that,
under well fertilized conditions, S. album can survive reasonably well without a host. An understanding of
whether S. album can discriminate and select a preferred host is lacking. Would Santalum album select a host plant
even under well fertilized soil conditions? these are questions that have not been addressed. The secondary
metabolites involved in host-parasite cross talk and the initiation of a parasitic developmental program have
been well understood in several plant parasites (such as cuscuta, Scrophulariaceae etc) of economically
important crops. An understanding of plant-plant cross talk, signaling events and host induced transcriptome
and metabolome changes is lacking for the root parasite, Santalum album. This basic understanding of Santalum's
parasitism would help both conservation and cultivation efforts.

References: Contact the author at veenaanil@ymail.com
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
70
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood Based Agroforestry Systems
Introduction
A
groforestry is a land
use system in which
trees and shrubs are
intentionally grown in
combination with food crops or
forage crops. Agro Forestry
systems (AFS) vary among the
communities since it has been
evolved in response to social,
economic, cultural, ecological,
ethical, and institutional factors.
The indigenous management of
AFS evolved through trial and
errors over a long period of time in
tropical and subtropical areas of the
world. Indian sandalwood
(Santalum album L.) is one of the
world’s most valuable tree species
woven into our culture and
heritage of India. Now a days,
farmers are widely cultivating
sandalwood based AFS (SAFS) in
their farm lands due to high
demand and high price, for the
wood and it can be easily cultivated
with other agricultural and
horticultural crops. The
sandalwood-based agroforestry
system is viable option to address
the current challenges viz., food,
wood, health security and
environmental security.
To address the declining share of
sandalwood in international
markets, conserve it in natural
areas and promote sandalwood
farming, the major sandalwood
producing States, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu have relaxed the
existing rules and regulations on
sandalwood cultivation in 2001 and
2002 respectively. Recently,
Maharashtra and Goa are also
amended its State Forest Acts on
M. V. Durai,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology,
18th Cross, Malleswaram, Bengaluru.
E-mail: duraimv@gmail.com
the similar line. Thus, policy changes led to domestication of
sandalwood in India. Landholders now have legal rights over the
sandalwood trees on their properties and growers can receive as much
as 100 percent of the value of the tree as determined by the forest
department. Cultivation of sandalwood on private lands has since
become an attractive option. As sandalwood tree is semi-root parasite, it
is cultivated with different combinations of food and fruits crops as host
plants without interfering regular farming systems. Sandalwood based
agroforestry system offers opportunities for inter-cropping and
generation regular income through host plants and intercropping still
maturation of sandalwood tree. Large scale commercial sandalwood
plantation is being established even in non-traditional sandalwood
growing states viz., Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Maharashtra, Gujarat,
Assam and Punjab.

Sandalwood - an ideal agroforestry tree
Sandalwood is being considered as a suitable species for agroforestry
systems due to following features:
 Small – medium size tree
 Grows well in a variety of soils
 Narrow and light crown
 Not demanding much nutrients
 Easy to propagate by seeds  Hardy and drought tolerant
 Easily amenable tree
 Leaves easily decompose.

 Good coppicer
Sandalwood plantation and its management
Farmers are cultivating sandalwood in different forms such as pure
block plantation, boundary plantations, and agroforestry systems (e.g.
sandalwood + horti system, sandalwood + agri system, sandalwood +
sericulture, sandalwood + apiculture) based on availability of land, host
plants, market and other prevailing socio-economic conditions. As the
sandalwood tree requires host plant mandatorily for its normal growth
and development, its management differs from that of agri-crops and
horticultural crops. The establishment and management of sandalwood
plantation involves various steps that are discussed below,
Farmers are cultivating sandalwood in different forms such as pure block
plantation, boundary plantations, and agroforestry systems (e.g.
sandalwood + horti system, sandalwood + agri system, sandalwood +
sericulture, sandalwood + apiculture) based on availability of land, host
71
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
plants, market and other prevailing socio-economic
conditions. As the sandalwood tree requires host plant
mandatorily for its normal growth and development,
its management differs from that of agri-crops and
horticultural crops. The establishment and
management of sandalwood plantation involves
various steps that are discussed below,
added in each pit.

Planting
Use healthy seedling with a single leading
shoot, (>1ft height), having collar diameter more
than 3.0 cm for raising plantation. While planting
sandalwood seedlings, right host plant should be
planted since sandalwood requires haustorial
connection through which sandalwood gets required
nutrients. Sandalwood can be planted in different
planting system like square planting, rectangular
and line planting (Fig 3a, 3b, 3c & 3d). Trench
planting method (Fig 4a) is used in arid regions
where as in high rainfall areas; ridge planting
method (Fig 4b) is employed.

Selection of site
Selection of site depends on edaphic and climatic
conditions, viz., temperature, rainfall, soil depth and
drainage conditions. Although, sandalwood tree
grows well at elevation 650 – 1200 m above MSL(
Mean Sea Level) with rainfall of 500-1600 mm.
Sandalwood requires partial shade or umbrella
shade during young and lateral shade with full overhead sun light for fast and straight growth during
later stage. In high rainfall areas, sandalwood growth
will be luxuriant but with negligible or no heartwood
and low oil content. Even if, sandalwood can be
grown in a variety of soils, for high quality
sandalwood, the site should have fertile soil with
neutral pH, good sunlight, well drain soil and
distinct annual seasons. Usually, the moderately
sloppy land most preferred for sandalwood. In case
of the undulating and sloppy ground, the plantation
should be raised along contours to prevent erosion
and to conserve moisture during growing period.

Fig 3a Square planting
Fig 3b Rectangular planting
Land preparation
Land preparation involves leveling, ploughing,
marking of pits with recommended spacing, digging
of pits and fencing. Ploughing helps to get well
developed root system, improve soil aeration, water
infiltration, remove of weeds and expose pests and
spores for sunlight. Usually, site preparation will be
done 3-4 months before planting, just before onset
monsoon (June – July).

Fig 3c Triangle planting
Land is cleared and ploughed during summer
season. Marking should be done for digging pits with
desired spacing. After marking, pitting should be
done with size 45 × 45 × 45 cm. Spacing and planting
design vary with choice of hosts, intercrops and
presence of existing vegetation. Insecticide/
fungicide may be applied in pit to kill the harmful
organisms during planting. At the time of planting,
2-3 kg of well decomposed farm yard manure is
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Fig 3d Quincunx planting
Fig 4a Trench planting in semi-arid and arid regions
72
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
link to the xylem of sandalwood tree. More than
300 species are listed as primary host plant species.
While choosing primary host, one should keep in
mind that the selected primary host should be
small, succulent, and easy to grow back after being
trimmed and also live long, locally available and not
compete with sandalwood plant. The role of the
secondary host is to replace the primary host which
may die at the age of 1-3 years after being transferred
from the nursery to the field. In addition, the
secondary host helps to supply nutrients. Secondary
hosts can survive for 6-8 years. The replacement of
secondary host with tertiary host should be
considered when both primary and secondary host
plants are dead. Common tertiary host plants are
Cassia siamea, Dalbergia latifolia, Casuarina
junghuniana, C. equisetifolia and Albizia falcataria. In
fact, non-browsable, Nitrogen fixing and high
coppicer host plant species should be given
preference. Capsicum frutescens, Alternanthera sp,
Acacia sp., Duranta repens, Solanum melongena
(eggplant), Lycopersicon esculentum Mill. (Tomato)
and Mimosa sp. are short term host. Tree species such
as Citrus sp (orange), Acacia vilosa, Cassia siamea,
Acacia auriculiformis, Gliricidia sepium, Tamarindus
indica, Citrus aurantifolia, Ziziphus mauritiana, Ficus
elastica. Among these hosts, Alternanthera sp. and
vegetable crops such as Capsicum frutescens, Solanum
melongena, Lycopersicum esculentum and Musa
paradisiaca are identified best hosts for sandalwood
based on growth, number of leaves and number of
haustoria. It is reported that Alternanthera is most
suitable host for high growth of sandalwood. The
cuttings of Alternanthera are planted together with
sandalwood seedlings in polybags. Among 32 hosts,
Casuarina equisetifolia, Melia dubia, Pongamia pinnata,
Acacia nilotica and Termianlia alata are reported as best
permanent hosts.

Fig 4b Ridge planting in high rainfall regions
Fig 5a Typical planting layout for sandalwood
Fig 5b Planting layout of sandalwood at Tirumala (AP)
Selection of host plants
Sandalwood being sandalwood is a (partial) root
parasite which requires host for its normal
development till the harvest. A lot of research has
been carried out on identification right host plants, its
interaction with sandalwood species and
sandalwood-host haustorial connection in India,
Australia, Indonesia, and New Caledonia. The lateral
roots can grow beyond 20m from the
sandalwood tree. As long as the lateral root
grows, the roots of the sandalwood that the
potential to associate with the roots of the
host plant. More than 70 species are
identified as suitable permanent hosts
based on the influence on growth of
sandalwood trees. Sandalwood needs
primary host plants to absorb nutrients
through haustoria, which makes a direct
Fig 2. Sandalwood with haustorial connection with tur dal
73
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
host plants attention should be given to
the size, shade nature, economic value of
host, and its contribution to the growth
and development of Sandalwood.
Besides, other factors must also be taken
into account that the growth of hosts
should not exceed the growth of
sandalwood because it will cause
competition to the elements of nutrients,
light and space.

Fig 3. Nutrient translocation between sandalwood
and hosts (casuarina + sandalwood; teak + sandalwood;
coconut + casuarina + sandalwood)
Anatomical studies indicated that a vascular
connectivity, haustorial connections developed
between the host and sandalwood. The haustoria is
functioned as a physiological link that supporting
nutritional requirements of sandalwood. It is further
confirmed with presence of translocated 32P in
sandalwood tree after six hours of injecting 32P isotope
in the host plant. The extent of translocation from hosts
to sandalwood (Fig. 3) varied from 28.9% (coconut +
Casuarina + rubber as host) to 78.5% (Casuarina +
rubber as hosts). Reverse translocation of 32P from
sandalwood to host was also observed. The
translocation from sandalwood tree to host Casuarina
was 26 % and to teak was 34.89 % (Rocha et al. 2017).

Fig 4a. Sandalwood + Sesbania (live host)
Irawan (2004) reported that when the association
between host and the sandalwood is good and
compatible, the sandalwood crown appears thick,
the leaves are wide and dark green color. On other
hand, if the association is not suitable or host not
found, then the appearance of the canopy is thin,
leaves are small and yellowish with chlorosis (Fig 4).
A good host plant should have a thin and watery skin
root. eg. members of Leguminosae. While selecting
Fig 4b. Sandalwood + Red gram (dead host)
Table.1 Suitable host plants for sandal wood agroforestry
Primary host
Red gram (Cajanus cajana)
Mimosa pudica at nursery stage
Horse gram (Macrotyloma uniflorum)
Field bean (Lablab purpureus)
Intermediate hosts
Papaya (Carica papaya), Drum stick
(Moringa oleifera)
Sesbania grandiflora
Guava (Psidium guajava)
Pomegranate (Punicum granatum)
Alternanthera sp.,
Sugar apple (Annona squamosa)
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
74
Long/Secondary hosts
Causurina
Grafted Tamarind (Tamarindus indica),
Melia-dubia, Silver Oak,
Indian Goose berry
(Emblica officinalis)
Mango (Mangifera indica)
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Irrigation
On the day of planting in field,
flood/drip irrigation is recommended.
From the day of planting, the watering
should be done on daily for early
establishment at a rate of 8 to 10 L per plant
and thereafter watering should be done
every four days once for 3 to 6 months
depending on soil moisture availability.
As sandalwood is hardy and drought
tolerant, it does not need much water.
Fig 5a. Drip irrigation Fig 5b. Lack of moisture in shallow stony soil
Normally watering is done during
herbicides must be avoided as it sometimes disturbs
summer season. Watering should have applied during
the growth of sandalwood and other host plants. It is
early morning and late evening, most preferably in
always
better to have manual and mechanical
evening. Shallow stony soil requires frequent watering
weeding/cleaning. Growing of Crotalaria species
during summer season (Fig 5a & b).
around young sandalwood plants is not only
providing additional nutrients but also reduces
Manure and fertilizer application
weed growth, enhance soil moisture because it is act
Sandalwood is not requiring any fertilizers during
as cover as well as nurse crop.
first year of planting. Fertilizers may be applied based
on the deficiency of nutrients in the soil. However,
Sandalwood based agroforestry models
DAP (Di-ammonium phosphate) at a rate of 50 gm to
As sandalwood is partial root parasite, it should be
100 gm shall be applied once a year just before the
cultivated
in combination with other crops as host in
monsoon and after soil working. Application of well
different planting design and spacing according to
decomposed manure is recommended after soil
prevailing
local socio-economic, environment,
working at the rate of two Kg per plant during planting
market conditions and farmers preference. Even if, it
and 5 kg/plant on 2nd year onwards. Nitrogen (N),
is suitable for bund planting, and block plantation,
phosphorus (P) and amino acids are obtained from
sandalwood
based agroforestry system is most
host plants, while calcium (Ca) and potassium (K) are
preferred one by the farmers since it provides
taken from the soil. The host plants will greatly affect
intermediate
income and fodder to the farmers.
the quality of the sandalwood oil produced from its
Spacing adopted for raising pure plantations is 3 x
heartwood since its quantity and types of nutrients
3m
- 5 x 5 m. The IWST, Bangalore has developed 3
varied.
sandalwood based agroforestry models viz.,
Weeding and cleaning
sandalwood block plantations, Silvi-Hort system
Weeding and cleaning should be done when the
(sandalwood + amla), Silvi-Agri (sandalwood+
weeds affect growth of sandalwood tree. Uses of
h o r s e g r a m ) .
According to IWST
studies, sandalwood
farming is highly
profitable when
compare other farming
systems. On trial and
error basis, the farmers
are also developed
different sandalwood
6a. Sandalwood in in-fertile stony soil
6b. Sandalwood growth in manured soil
75
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
based AFS viz., Silvi-Horti (sandalwood+mango;
sandalwood +tamarind; sandalwood + lemon), SilviSilviculture (sandalwood +silver oak; sandalwood
+melia). There are more than 20 sandalwood based
agroforestry models with different hosts and
spaecing were have been recorded (Fig 7).

sandalwood + mahogany
sandalwood + mango+ pumkin
sandalwood + drumstick
sandalwood + pomegranate
sandalwood + arecanut
sandalwood + papaya
sandalwood + silver oak + bengal gram
sandalwood + soffee + silver oak
Fig 7. Sandalwood based agroforstry models in Karnataka
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
76
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Canopy opening and shade management
should be done judiciously up to 10 feet during 2-4
years. Pruning should be done with sharp knife
during dormant season. Always the cut branches as
much as possible close to main stem from the
bottom to avoid split. Prune only those branches
which are less than little finger size and branch whorl
in a year. Never prune the tree more than 1/3 of the
tree height and should maintain at least 40-50%
canopy (Fig 8). As sandalwood trees are highly
sensitive to physical injury at the early stage, at-most
care should be taken while considering pruning. The
pruning should be at right time/season and right age
by the right person. Otherwise, it would cause
irreversible damage to the trees and also may invite
pests and pathogen to invade.

As three or more components co-exist in the
sandalwood based agroforestry system, it cause
competition among components for light, space,
water and nutrients. Since sandalwood tree is strong
light demander, manipulation of its canopy and
canopy of its host in such a way that both
sandalwood and intercrops/host plants would get
sufficient sun light and space for normal growth and
development. Canopy manipulation (prunning)
should be done judiciouly based on habit and crown
architecture of host plants. .
While growing sandalwood trees under the shade
of existing vegetation, it does not require any
pruning. However, when it is grown in open space
and have number of low-lying branches, the pruning
Sandalwood trees in un-balanced shade-light ratio
Sandalwood in about 50% shade-light ratio
Fig.8 Canopy manipulation by pruning
Incorrectly pruned tree
Rightly pruned tree
 Single trunk and a leading shoot at top.

 An inappropriate shape “a lollypop”
because too many lower branches have been
removed.

 Canopy extends approximately 2/3 of the
tree height, providing good area for
photosynthesis for good growth.

 A reduced canopy with reduced
photosynthetic capacity and low vigor of the
tree.

 Canopy that tapers towards the top,
providing good balance (a low centre of
gravity).

 Many branches at top which make tree top
too heavy and unstable, particularly in wind.

 A sandalwood tree rightly pruned should
have:
77
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Growth and harvest of sandalwood
heartwood formation is slow and the oil content is
low, while the slower-growing trees on dry sites at
elevations between 600-900 m and rainfall 500-1000
mm develop maximum heartwood with high oil
content. There is a strong association between
heartwood development and soil type, rainfall and
the level of sun exposure on the canopy of the
sandalwood has been reported. However, about 1320% of sampled trees in the population failed to
produce heartwood even at the age of 10-14 years old
(Brand et al, 2006). Thus, yield of heartwood varies
according to age and locality. As there are significant
variations between tree in heartwood content and oil
yields, considerable scope for selection and
improvement of sandalwood.

As secondary xylem ages, water conducting tissues
stop functioning when the tree ages, which may lead
to heartwood formation (Jones et al 2006).
Heartwood formation varies within and between
stands. For example, Srimathi and Kulkarni (1995)
reported that heartwood is formed at 4th year, Liu
and others (2012) noted in 6th year, Brand and others
(2012) 7th year and Rai (1990) found in 10th year. The
mean heartwood yield per year is varies 12.5kg/year/tree (Brand et al., 2012). The harvesting
age lies between 15 - 30 years. The expected harvest
period in shallow or stony soil is 15 - 20 years whereas
in fertile soil, high rainfall areas is 30 - 40 years.
Modest commercial quantities of heartwood are
produced after 15–20 years. On deep rich soils in
moist areas, trees grow luxuriantly but the
Conclusion
The sandalwood based agrforestry is viable option to all categories of farmers as low inputs requirement and it
has wide adaptabilty. Policy changes on sandalwood cultivation, help to boost sandalwood domestication and
cultivation in India. However, systematic research needed to fill the gaps related to optimum harvesting age,
heartwood yield, age of heartwood initiation, suitable host plant, allelopathic effect on crop plants and nutrition
demand of sandalwood when intercroppped with agriculture crops in different agro-climatic situations.

References
Brand, J.E., Norris, L.J., Dumbrell, I.C. 2012. Estimated heartwood weights and oil concentrations within 16-yearold Indian sandalwood (Santalum album) trees planted near Kununurra, Western Australia. Australian
Forestry, 75, 225–232.
Irawan, T. 2004. Laporan Studi Pengaruh Keragaman Inang Terhadap Pertumbuhan dan Perkembangan
Cendana. Kupang.
Jones, C.G., Ghisalberti, E.L., Plummer, J.A. and Barbour, E.L. 2006. Quantitative co-occurrence of
sesquiterpenes; a tool for elucidating their biosynthesis in Indian sandalwood, Santalum album.
Phytochemistry, 67, 2463–2468.
Liu Xiao Jin , Xu DaPing , Yang ZengJiang , Zhang NingNan , Yang LiJun , Deng HeDa , Zhang XiaoYun. 2012.
Evaluation of growth and heartwood formation of young sandalwood plantations in Guangdong Province,
south China, Scientia Silvae Sinicae, 48(5): 108-115.
Rai, S.N. 1990. Status and cultivation of sandalwood in India. Pp. 66–71 in ‘Proceedings of the Symposium on
Sandalwood in the Pacific, Honolulu, 9–11 April 1990’, ed. by L. Hamilton and C.E. Conrad. USDA Forest
Service: Berkeley, California.
Rocha Delphy, P.K. Ashokan, A V Santhoshkumar. E. V. Anoop and P. Sureshkumar. 2014. Influence of host
plant on the physiological attributes of field-grown sandalwood tree (Santalum album), Journal of Tropical
Forest Science, 26(2):166-172
Srimathi, R. A., Kulkarni, H. D. and Venkatesan, K. R. 1995. Recent Advances in Research and Management of
Sandalwood (Santalum album L.) in India (eds), Associated Publishing Company, New Delhi, 416pp.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
78
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-Sep. 2021
Sandalwood Spike Disease: A Rising Threat
to the Conservation of Indian Sandalwood
Introduction
I
ndian sandalwood
(Santalum album L.), which is
acknowledged as “Royal
Tree” in subcontinent is one of the
most economically important tree
species (Sundararaj, 2008). India
has been the traditional leader of
sandalwood oil production for
perfumery and pharmaceuticals.
Its trade has started as early as 17th
century. Indian rulers maintained
monopoly on the sandalwood
resource to ensure financial
strength for dominance and trade
warfare. Realizing the value of
sandalwood Tippu Sultan, King of
Mysore declared it as a ‘Royal Tree’
in 1792. It is perhaps the only wood
in the world sold by weight but not
by volume and is the second most
expensive wood in the world (Arun
Kumar et. al. 2012). The price of
Indian sandalwood and its oil has
risen significantly in the past
decade mainly due to depletion in
productions annually at the rate of
20% since 1995 (Anantha
padmanabha, 2000). India’s
production during 1930s through
1950s was around 4000 tonnes of
heartwood per year which had
decreased to an average of 300
tonnes per year. Correspondingly
the wood price from 1996 to 2012
has increased in arithmetic
progression reached Rs. 60,00,000
per ton in 2013. It has impacted the
oil export as the maximum quantity
of 27,930 kg sandalwood oil
exported in the year 1997-98 has
reduced to only 10 kg in 2015-16
R. Sundararaj*, R. Raja Rishi, K. N. Manjula, S. Padma and N. Kavya,
Forest Protection Division, Institute of Wood Science and Technology,
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru.
*E-Mail: rsundararaj@icfre.org
(Export-Import Data Bank V.7.1 Trade Stat, 2016). The present
government rate of sandalwood ranges from Rs. 12,000/kg to as high as
Rs.29,500/ kg for the best quality.

Factors for the depletion of sandalwood resources
The decline in sandalwood production is mainly due to the depletion
of sandalwood trees in its natural habitats of forest. The depletion is
attributed to factors like illicit felling, smuggling and pests and disease.
Among these factors Sandalwood Spike Disease (SSD), is the most
destructive of disease of sandalwood and is one of the major causes for
the decline in sandalwood production as the quantum of trees extracted
due to SSD is enormous. Over a million of sandalwood trees had been
removed in Coorg and Mysore states during 1903-1916 (Rangaswami
and Sreenivasya, 1934) and 98,734 trees were extracted during 19171925 in Salem alone due to SSD (John, 1957). In Karnataka the growing
stock has been reduced to 25 percent of its initial level in the last two
decades of 20th century (Swaminath et. al. 1998). All these mass
extractions due to SSD in natural habitats pushed the sandalwood to be
first classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation
of Nature in the year 1998.

Sandalwood Spike Disease (SSD) the real causative agent
SSD is the most destructive disease of S. album and it is characterized
by extreme reduction in the size of leaves and internodes accompanied
by stiffening of the leaves. In advanced stage, owing to the progressive
reduction in leaf size and internodes, the whole shoot looks like a ‘spike
inflorescence’. Foliage also becomes stiff, resulting in a crowded
appearance on twigs and a bushy appearance (Fig.7 and 8). It was first
reported in Coorg, South India in the year 1899 (McCarthy, 1899) and it
was initially considered as viral disease and then as the disease caused
by Mycoplasma Like Organisms (MLO) (Parthasarathi et.al.1966). In
1969, a breakthrough was achieved by three independent research
groups that confirmed the causal agents are phytoplasmas.
Phytoplasmas are large group of obligate, endophytic, cell wall-less
bacterial parasites which are classified within the class Mollicutes and
they infect the phloem cell of plants and transmitted through insect
vectors.

79
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Chronology of the symptoms and death of SSD affected tree in Marayoor
Fig.1. No symptom of SSD on 17.09.2017
Fig.2. Suspected symptom of SSD on 19.12.2017
Fig.3 Tree with distinct symptom
of SSD on 05.03.2018
Fig.4 Tree fully dried due to
SSD on 06.07.2018
Fig.5Tree showing 50% of SSD
Fig.6 Tree dried due to SSD
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
80
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Rising threat to the natural population of
Sandalwood at Marayoor
Roadmap to contain SSD
Considering the impact of SSD in the past, it is
imperative to protect the sandalwood populations
in its natural habitats from SSD and contain its
spread to the farmer’s field before it causes colossal
damage. Unlike other crops, loss of a single tree is
crucial for the sandalwood growers as every plant
needs to be survived for better monetary returns and
hence extraction of trees cannot be taken as an option
any more to control the SSD. Hitherto, many
attempts have been made to counter spike disease of
sandalwood, but the ability to curb the rapid spread
of disease in India has been unsuccessful mainly due
to the lack of knowledge about vector identities and
not having any resistant varieties/populations of the
host. Hence, there is a lot of scopes to expand
research on the management of SSD by the
production of disease-free plants using tissue culture
from, superior genotypes. There is no natural
resistance against SSD but genetic modification
could be applied to produce plants with reduced
phytoplasma titers or with insect resistance. Thus,
there is a need for substantial research and
development to produce SSD- resistance in trees by
applying biotechnological advancements. For over
100 years, significant advances have been made in
the area of plant pathogenic viruses and their
transmission by insect vectors. Regrettably, progress
in phytoplasma diseases and their transmission by
insect vectors did not keep pace. Consequently,
vectors of most of the phytoplasma diseases are
unknown, which is evidenced by the fact that so far
no insect is authentically confirmed as a
phytoplasma vector of SSD, though this disease is
more than a century old. Identification and
diagnosing the insect vectors of SSD and their
behaviour are the need of the hour to evolve effective
vector management measures, which will play a
prime role in containment and avoiding the spread of
the disease. Also the role of seeds in the transmission
of SSD has to be ruled out. Hence breakthroughs are
required to manage the SSD which will ensure
protection of sandalwood from SSD thereby the
conservation and sustainable utilisation of this
valuable bio-resource in India and safeguarding the
expectations of the sandalwood growing farmers.

The situation in Marayoor sandalwood reserve of
Kerala that had a density of about 1000 sandalwood
trees per hectare (Nayar, 1988) was considered
relatively free from SSD till 1980 (Prasad, 2011). It
recorded 21.4 per cent density of sandalwood in 200506 (Sundararaj and Sharma, 2010) which is now
reduced to 1.92 per cent mainly due to the death of
trees by SSD and consequent extraction on annual
basis. At present, natural populations of Sandalwood
are mainly available at Marayoor in Kerala and some
patches of reserve forests in Karnataka. Recently it is
confirmed that in these natural habitats the trees are
heavily infected with SSD associated with Candidatus
Phytoplasma asteris and 1 to 5% trees are dying
annually. Recent investigation carried out by the
Institute of Wood Science and Technology (IWST)
Bengaluru, revealed that a tree showing symptom of
infection of SSD dies within 18 months and it kills even
very young naturally regenerating saplings before
reaching the age of heartwood formation (Fig.1 to 4).
As per the Working Plan of Marayoor Forest Division
even a single sandalwood is not there in Sandalwood
Reserve 51 (SR 51) as all the trees were extracted due to
SSD (Prasad, 2011). In other heavily infested areas like
SR 52 and SR 54 most of the trees are in various stages
of infection and dying and the dreaded disease is
spreading very fast to other Sandalwood reserves like
NSR 1, NSR 2, VSR1 and VSR 2 (Fig. 5 to 6). Similar
situation of dying of naturally regenerating trees is
happening in the natural habitats of sandalwood in
Karnataka. The present increased phase of spreading
of the infection is primarily due to the fact of restriction
on green felling in forests, which allow the infected tree
to serve as inoculums till it dies and spread the
phytoplasma pathogen to the maximum extent to the
healthy trees by the potential vectors. Realising the
sharp decline in the sandalwood population in the
states and having realised that they cannot be the
custodian of sandalwood any more, Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu forest departments have amended the
Sandalwood act in 2001 and 2002, respectively and
made grower himself an owner of the sandalwood as
per the Amended Acts. The purpose of the
amendment is to encourage farmers and corporate
bodies to grow sandalwood plantations to meet the
growing demand.

81
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
References
Ananthapadmanabha H S. (2000). Sandal wood and its marketing trend. My forest. 36: 147-151.
Arun Kumar A.N., Geeta Joshi and Mohan Ram H.Y. (2012). Sandalwood : history, uses, present status and the
future. Current Science, 013 (12): 1408-1416.
Export import data bank version 7.1. (2016). Trade stat, Government of India, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, Department of Commerce, viewed on 16th Nov. http://commerce.nic.in/eidb/Default.asp.
John V.T. (1957). A review of plant viruses in India. Journal of Madras University. B 27:373-450.
Mc Carthy. (1899). Progress report of forest administration, Coorg. 1898-1899.
Nayar R. (1988b). Damage by mycoplasmas in Indian Forests. In. Ram Prakash (ed.), Advances in Forestry in
India. International Book Distributors, Dehradun, India. Vol III, pp. 127-158
Parthasarathi K, Gupta S.K and Rao P.S. (1966). Studies on Sandal Spike Disease. Part VIII. Some useful stain tests
for the diagnosis of the spike disease. Proceedings of Indian Academy of Science (Plant). 64: 152-156.
Prasad K C. 2011. Working plan Marayur Sandal Division, Government of Kerala, Forests and Wildlife
Department, 381 pp.
Rangaswami S. and Sreenivasaya M. (1934). Insect Transmission of Spike Disease of Sandal (Santalum album
Linn.). Current Science. 4: 17-19.
Sundararaj R. (2008) . Distribution of predatory arthropod communities in selected sandal provenances of south
India. Journal of Biopesticides. 1: 86-91.
Sundararaj R. and Sharma G. (2010). Studies on the floral composition in the six selected provenances of Sandal
(Santalum album Linnaeus) of South India. Biological forum 2 (22):73-77.
Swaminath M.H, Hosmath B. J. and Mallesha B.B. (1998). The Status of Sandalwood in India: Karnataka. Aciar
proceedings 5-5.

Fig.7. Young tree with symptom of SSD
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Fig.8. Matured tree with symptom of SSD
82
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Compartmentalization of Damage in Trees (CODIT)
with a glimpse on Sandalwood
A Muthu Kumar, Sandhya G M, and Dakshayini G,
Forest Pathology Section, Forest Protection Division,
IWST, Malleshwaram, Bengaluru.

Trees are among the most successful life forms to
have evolved in terms of longevity, size and
ecological dominance. By and large the dominance is
a consequence of a unique ability to form highly
specialized tissues. Nevertheless, like other
organisms, trees are exposed to a wide variety of
biotic and abiotic stresses throughout their long life
span. Trees and woody plants modulate their
phenotypes to cope with harshening environments
(phenotypic plasticity, Nicotra et al., 2010). One such
phenotypic modulation is Compartmentalization,
which can be further elucidated as
Compartmentalization of Damage in Trees,
(CODIT). Compartmentalization is an efficient
defence mechanism that limits or curtails the spread
of infection or injury caused by numerous biotic and
abiotic stresses in trees (Shigo, 1970). Else, the effect
of infection or injury accumulates throughout the
lifespan and scavenges the survival of woody species
(Shigo and Marx, 1977).

Tree Longevity and Compartmentalization:
The great longevity in plants are characterized by a
greater degree of modularity, which is apparent in
defense systems that compartmentalize injuries and
biotic attackers, apart from root-to-shoot connections
and bark stripping (Larson et al., 1993). Tree
longevity would therefore rely on vegetative vigor
(to compartmentalize / over grow the pathogen) and
disease resistance (to prevent invasion of pathogen)
(Lanner, 2002).

Compartmentalization in tree species:
Tree species compartmentalize the decay /
damage in unique ways and with a range of
effectiveness, exhibit a variety of CODIT profiles,
while some species like the Oaks can inhibit the
spread of pathogens within their organism by
creating both chemical and anatomical boundaries
(Shigo, 1984). Conversely, other tree species like the
poplars (Populus spp.) are less able to protect
themselves and wood decay can quickly affect a
larger part of the trunk, thus creating, for example,
wide rot-holes (Shigo, 1984).

Living cells in trees and CODIT:
The role of living wood cells in the defence (active
/ pre-formed) mechanism of trees was well
explained by the CODIT model, i.e.,
Compartmentalization of Decay in Trees, where ‘D’
symbolizing ‘Decay’, however “Decay” was
superseded by ‘Damage or Dysfunction’ in light of
later findings related to tree defence processes
(Shigo, 1970). Alex Shigo created the CODIT model
in the 1970s, who wanted to make the science of tree
compartmentalization accessible to practitioners
within forestry and arboriculture for giving them a
sound scientific foundation prior to carrying out
work on trees (Shigo and Marx, 1977). Later, the
simplicity of the model embraced insightful scrutiny
by scientific community, where the scrutiny was
mostly linked on what caused the tree to
compartmentalize, whether that is injury / wound
(decay fungi / biotic) or any damage of the tree
defence system (Boddy and Rayner, 1983) in trees of
great longevity.

Fast-growing broadleaved species (pioneers), are
good at colonizing open areas and competing with
low ground/shrub vegetation, but they generally
have a weak compartmentalization capacity of
wounded branches since their investment in defence
barriers is very low and they are short-lived. The time
for branch occlusion after wounding is important as
the stem wood is exposed to humidity and fungal
infections before closure occurs (Shigo, 1989). Our
concern here is how the slow growing species
respond (for compartmentalization / occlusion) to
injury / wound, very particular to species like
sandalwood, where pruning (deliberate wound) is a
systematic practice.

83
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
In addition, there is very little information on
pruning and wound occlusion / compartment
alization in tropical trees, most of the literature
focuses on conifers (Hein, 2008). In general, trees may
have the ability to compartmentalize deleterious
somatic mutations, and escape senescence if the
negative consequences are restricted to that module
(Bernard et al., 2020), which signifies the defence
mechanism of trees in nature.

Compartmentalization in Sandalwood:
Response of Sandalwood to wounding
(pruning):
Depending on tree species, wounds (specific to
pruning) of more than 5–10 cm diameter (up to 10 cm
for trees species with good compartmentalization
potential and up to 5 cm for trees with poor capacity)
were found to be a significant factor in discoloration,
decay and cavities (Schwarze, 2001). Plantation
sandalwood production is complex with multiple
hosts required through the life of a sandalwood tree.
Due to the complexities of the parasitic/host
relationship, at times it was difficult to ascertain if the
cause of the sporadic deaths was due to fungal
disease or lack of host relationships (Barbour et al.
2010), which further augments the available little
information regarding disease or damage to
sandalwood (Burgess, 2018). Nevertheless, the
wounds caused by pruning facilitated fungal niche in
the affected / pruned area of sandalwood. Barbour et
al. (2010) isolated endophytes, cankers and rot fungi
from heartwood from S. album in Western Australia
where fungal infections occurred via pruning
wounds.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
The wood exposed by wounding is available for
infection by many microorganisms, where a
relatively small number actually do infect and spread
into the wood from the exposed surface of the wound
(Shigo 1967). Sandalwood tree response to pruning
was significantly affected by age, where the average
wound diameter was much greater for the older
trees. Over 80% of all pruning wounds on younger
trees were occluded by 12 months (leaving wounds
of 0.5 mm diameter on average), with 97% occlusion
by 18 months, however, in the 5-year-old trees most
wounds were still exposed at 18 months (Burgess,
2018). The season of pruning did have some effect on
the microbial niche, where, pruning during dry
season was dominated by Ascomycetes while in wet
season Basidiomycetes were much more common
(Burgess, et al., 2018). Some decay fungi are
specialists and can degrade only certain components
of the wood cell wall and associated structural
84
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
physiology (El-Hamalawi and Menge, 1994).
Therefore, in order to reduce infection risk, pruning
should be done on the faster responding younger
trees (Burgess, et al., 2018), appears teleological.

materials, other decay fungi are generalists and can
degrade most or all of the wood substance. This
pattern of succession is not absolutely fixed and will
vary from place-to-place with circumstance and age
of the tree (Smith, 2006). Young age sandalwood
trees had a lower decay rating than the older trees,
due to a higher occlusion rate, where most of the
wounds created in the younger trees often appeared
to have occluded completely with new bark on the
surface. Additionally, the tree response to the
pruning wounds resulted in a significant reduction
in the discoloration (stain fungi) observed 18 months
after pruning for the younger trees, regardless of the
season of pruning (Burgess, et al., 2018).

Apart from physiological mechanisms, anatomical
components also need further investigation in
sandalwood. In general, literature says, after proper
pruning, one of the constitutive boundaries that
contribute to compartmentalization after branch
pruning is the branch protection zone located at the
base of the branch. The protection zone is encircled by
the stem and contains constitutive chemicals (SMs)
that resist the spread of infection. In addition, the
protection zone provides a framework for the induced
formation of a reaction zone (Pearce, 2000) that further
resists the spread of infection. Research shows that the
presence of a pronounced branch collar is associated
with effective compartmentalization following branch
removal (O’Hara, 2007).

Interpretation:
This little knowledge on defence mechanism of
trees clears some facts about compartmentalization /
occlusion of the pathogen within the reaction / barrier
zone (infected portion), in order to protect themselves
from the pathogen and arrest further spread of
pathogen. However, this phenomenon of
compartmentalization / occlusion varies from species
to species of trees. Pruning in sandalwood is practiced
as a strategy to augment the commercial bole value of
the tree, although appropriate pruning regime to
optimize sandalwood heartwood yield is critical.
Burgess, et al., 2018, reported pruning wounds
remains as an entry path for a large diversity of canker
and rot fungi as well as saprophytes and endophytes,
however, successful disease/decay free cultivation of
sandalwood will depend on pruning stage, where
pruning could be practiced early in the tree’s rotation
i.e., when the tree is at its most vigorous state.
The physiological mechanisms (parenchyma and
vessel inter connectivity, synthesis and transport of
SMs etc.) involving host-pathogen interaction needs
further investigation, as pathogens constantly
challenge the defence processes and compartmenta
lization is not always successful due to pathogen
virulence, time or stress factors which weaken the host
defences enabling disease outbreaks in future. For
example, canker formation is strongly affected by host
Compartmentalization / occlusion
(red circles) in sandalwood
Reference: Contact the author at iwst.muthukumar@gmail.com
85
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Conserve Entomophily Paradise of
Indian Sandalwood (Santalum album L.)
Where wise actions are the fruit of life, wise discourse is the pollination
- Bryuant H Mc. Gill
R. Sundararaj*, K.N. Manjula, S. Padma,
N. Kavya and R. Raja Rishi,
Forest Protection Division, Institute of Wood Science and
Technology, Bengaluru.
*Email: rsundararaj@icfre.org
P
ollination is a biological wonder for gene
recombination in Angiosperms that plays a
vital role in generating a nutritive and
more immanently diverse plant population that is
indirectly responsible for ecological consistency,
community endurance, and ecosystem stability.
Pollination is facilitated by insects, wind, water,
birds and animals, thus referred to as agents of
pollination. Animal pollinators especially bees,
butterflies and moths, birds and bats, and beetles and
other insects pollinate three-fourths of the world’s
flowering plants and about 35 per cent of the world’s
food crops. Entomophily is a form of pollination
whereby pollen grains of plants, is disseminated by
insects. Dobbs and Muller are the first to discover the
role of insects in pollination, and hence called as
father of pollination ecology (McGregor 1976).
Pollinators visit flowers in search of nectar and
pollen as their food source. During this process, they
accidentally brush against the floral reproductive
parts and pollens get deposited on their body and
thus help the plants to achieve pollination for
successful production of fruit and seed. Globally 33
per cent of food production and 80 per cent of
pollination is bestowed only by honey bees. Other
non-bee insects also, contribute over 39 per cent of
worldwide pollination. The co-evolution of these
pollinators and flowers has favoured the
sustainability of life on the earth. Hence, there is a
need to understand the overwhelming glory of
entomophily and our dependence on these insects
for sustaining agricultural and natural habitats
worldwide. But, widespread diminishing of these
insect pollinators is a key illustration of a loss of
crucial ecosystem service due to their deprivation of
natural habitats.

morphology, size, and colour of heartwood, growth
rate, and years of commencement of the heartwood is
primarily due to its strict cross-pollination
phenomena (Bhaskar, 1992). Early anthesised flower
are pale green and are coincident with pollen
maturity and later completely anthesis flower
gradually change from reddish white into maroon,
along with the receptivity of the stigma, while the
anthers gradually shrink and pollen started to lose
viability. Thus the sandalwood flower is a
protoandrous type of flower development.
According to Sundararaj et al. (2020) indicated that
the pollinator guild of S. album consists of 82 species
of insects which includes 6 species of Diptera, 20
species of Hymenoptera, 55 species of Lepidoptera,
and a species of Odonata in the natural forest
ecosystems. Among the pollinator guild the visit of
honeybees viz. Apis cerana indica and A. florea were
dominant and in abundant and probably be playing a
key role as pollinators of sandalwood. The hourly
activity of insects visiting sandalwood flowers
indicated that most of the insects were active from 10
AM to 4 PM with peak activity from 12 noon to 1 PM.
In the natural forest ecosystems the sandalwood
trees are not pruned, hence with required lateral
branches which harbours foraging habitat of
numerous beneficial insects like pollinators which
are getting missed in pruned trees. The agro-forestry
models of cultivating sandalwood also support
apiculture practices that built the economy and
improve the productivity of crop. Hence, we have the
greater responsibility to grow sandalwood in its
natural way without pruning and creating beefriendly environment for conserving the
entomophily paradise, thereby sustainable
The sandalwood tree is self-incompatible and
adapted for cross-pollination by insects and
dispersal of fruits by birds and bats. The innate range
of phenotypic and genotypic variations in terms of
87
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
cultivation and conservation of Indian
sandalwood is ensured.

health, forms a principle driver for declining of
non- target living creatures like pollinators due to a
loss of floral diversity and abundance (Hall and
Martins 2020). In combination with the excessive
use of agrochemicals along with detrimental pruning
of sandalwood has a negative effect on the foraging
ability and life span of pollinator’s, which leads to the
colossal loss of pollination in the cultivation of
sandalwood and apiculture.

Recently ecosystem has encountered perilous
transformation viz., urbanisation, deforestation,
monoculture, indiscriminate use of pesticide and
fertilisers affecting health and wealth of the nature.
Due to this, the magnificent mobile ecosystem
service provider’s like pollinator’s life is in risk,
simultaneously threatening the food security and
natural capital as global agriculture has become more
pollinator-dependent. An estimated five billion
people may experience losses in crop production due
to insufficient pollination (Kramer et al., 2019). The
ubiquitous nature of pollinators made them to
interact with human influenced landscapes which
lead to frequent interference with anthropogenic
chemicals like pesticides, herbicides and fungicides.
These chemicals have a devastating effect on soil
Sandalwood is adopted for cross pollination, thus
the health and growth of plant depends on the
viability and genetic fitness of the seed. The
production of such seeds is totally dependant on the
pollinators due to out-breeding nature of
sandalwood. Thus the diversity and abundance of
pollinators and status of sandalwood plantation is
inter-related. Hence, it is an urgent need to conserve
the pollinators in the sandalwood based ecosystems.

Reference
Bhaskar, V. 1992. Pollination biology and fertilization in Santalum album L. (Santalaceae). Flora, 187: 73-78.
Kramer, R. C., Sharp, R.P., Weil, C., Bennett, E.M., Pascual, U., Arkema, K.K. and Hamann, M., 2019. Global
modeling of nature’s contributions to people. Science, 366:255-258.
Hall, D.M. and Martins D.J. 2020. Human dimensions of insect pollinator conservation, Current Opinion in Insect
Science, 38:107-114.
McGregor, S. E. 1976. Insect pollination of cultivated crop plants. Agriculture Handbook No. 496 Agricultural
Research Service United States Department of Agriculture.
Sundararaj, R. Raja Rishi, R. and Padma, S. 2020. Conservation of pollinators is vital for the sustainable
cultivation and conservation of Indian sandalwood (Santalum album L.). Insect environment, 20, 64-67.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
88
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Heartwood Estimation in Standing Trees
of Santalum album L.
Divakara B N, Prabuddha HR and Chaitra S,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Malleshwaram, Bengaluru.

Introduction
Why to estimate heartwood in sandalwood
Sandalwood is emerging as significant agroforestry tree crop which is
mainly harvested for its heartwood as it is highly valued as the flagship
species that yields a good revenue for a grower. There is a huge demandsupply gap for Indian sandalwood where the prices are flaring day by
day. This offers, openings for countries to dominate the trade by
upscaling sandalwood farming among farmers and various
stakeholders. Employing tools to estimate the formation of heartwood
in standing trees prior to harvesting, mainly for sandalwood can be
regulated thereafter if known that the inner growth is still slow. This
way of finding the heartwood and its growth status without felling will
help the farmer to retain the tree until good heartwood growth is
attained which in turn benefits him to reap full worth of tree.

How to estimate the heartwood
Heartwood
formed
Heartwood
formation initiated
Heartwood formation in sandalwood trees generally starts around 8 –
12 years of age, but what activates this process has not been very well
understood. Certain factors, generally relating to stress, such as gravelly
dry soil, insolation, and range of elevation (500 – 700 m), seem to provide
favourable environment for the formation of heartwood, irrespective of
the size of the stem after 8 years of age. Before estimation of heartwood,
some of the morphological clues may be checked by looking at the bark
condition all-round the tree as shown in the figure1.

No heartwood
formation
S
antalum album L. is one of
the species in genus
Santalum producing high
quality heartwood and oil.
Sandalwood has increasingly
focused on describing heartwood
based on its biochemical,
physiological and structural
characters that influence its
performance. Heartwood
formation in sandalwood varies
under different environmental
conditions, interaction with host
and influences the ecosystems
where it is grown. Estimating
heartwood formation within the
standing tree trunk could
significantly improve the
understanding of heartwood
quantity. Percentage of heartwood
increases significantly with age but
also differs within same Diameter
at Breast Height (DBH) class from
one geographical location to
another. Studies indicates that
though sandalwood grows well
across different states in India,
there is no uniform pattern in
heartwood formation with the
increasing age of the tree which
may be attributed to varying
edapho-climatic conditions and
source material. The main purpose
to carry out estimation for
heartwood is to know the presence
of heartwood in sandalwood, if
present what is the amount of
heartwood volume in standing
tree.

Figure1. Morphological identification of heartwood formation
in standing trees of Santalum album L.

89
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Therefore, there is need for a more accurate and
spontaneous technique which can quantify the
heartwood content in the trunk. In general,
heartwood estimation is done through following few
methodologies:
1
instrument, then twisted into the tree. Once the bit
has reached a little more than half-way through the
trunk’s diameter, the extractor, a thin metal sleeve,
is used to retrieve the core sample. Removing of the
core sample is done with shallow extraction spoon.
The most frequently employed increment borers
extract cores of 4.35 – 5.15 mm in diameter. However,
diameters of 8 mm, 10 mm and 12 mm are also
available for studies needing a higher amount of
wood sample. Small-diameter borers tend to break
easily and can often exhibit substantial distortions as
a consequence of the boring process.

Increment boring method
a Manual increment boring method
b Power increment boring method
2
Electric Resistance Tomograph (ERT)
1. Increment boring method
b. Power increment boring method
In this method, a specialized instrument known as
increment borer is used for heartwood assessment by
extracting the core sample from a standing tree
trunk. Increment borers are generally operated
manually, however, power operated increment
borers are also available and are in use.

Manual method of heartwood estimation which is
tedious, and time consuming, pave a way for new
future oriented better technology to ease the work.
Increment borers come in a great variety of models,
lengths, core diameters and sizes. The mechanism of
cordless drills has upgraded impressively, making
them a substitute for driving and removing
increment bore bits. High torque cordless drills can
condense the time required to extract cores by a third
and substantially lessen the effort required. The
borer bits are made from hardened steel with
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) coating for
protection and reduced friction. The extractors are
made of stainless steel with metallic head and special
design for easy core extraction of the wood. A well
maintained increment borer can very well stand up
to thousands of borer tests. The instrument consists
of battery, gearbox, reaction bar, and increment core
a. Manual increment boring method
Traditional method of measuring the tree’s
heartwood is by boring manually, as it is a reliable
way to estimate its growth; this method has been
adopted for living trees for a long time now. This
sampling instrument is most common and widely
used across the world. The instrument extracts a
small, pencil-sized piece of wood or core sample,
from the trunk of the tree to validate the heartwood
and sapwood content. This tool uses a tapered
cutting thread with 2 to 3 – threading at one end,
which drives the borer into the tree when turned. A
mini-auger is drilled by hand
from the bark to the centre (pith)
of the tree. The resulting core
sample extracted from the hole
displays the growth of heartwood
and its demarcation with
sapwood at that point in the tree
which can be visually observed.
Core sample extracted from power increment borer
Power increment borer
The hole bored in the tree is then
concealed by filling with wax, to
driller. The battery is charged fully and connected to
avoid future infection to trees. Increment borers are
the borer, by turning on the test switch the drilling bit
tidy instruments that consist of a handle (that serves
starts rotating, then placed on the tree to make a hole
double duty as a case also), a bit and an extractor. The
and the heartwood core is extracted from the trunk.
bit is locked onto the handle, making a “T” shaped
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
90
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
2. Electric Resistance Tomograph
(ERT)
Electric Resistance Tomograph (ERT), is an
advanced innovation used to detect and
characterize the internal formation of
heartwood in standing trees nondestructively. This method gives high
resolution and more precision in estimating
the heartwood content by displaying a 3D
image of the heartwood. Using this technique
the estimations can be conducted for large
number of trees at various heights
unceasingly. Earlier this method was
employed in the field of geophysics, later in 1998 Just
and Jacob, applied this method to detect the inner
growth data of the trunk with altered mathematical
algorithms. Tomograms obtained by this equipment
are based on electric conductance and resistance.

Plate 4. Estimation of Heart Wood in Sandalwood
Using Electric Resistance Tomograph (ERT)
heartwood can be obtained accurately.
When girth value of the tree is available,
The radius of the tree is calculated at breast height
using the formula;
In this method, the point electrodes/nails are
hammered or pierced around the tree in a
circumferentially even manner at a specific height of
the tree trunk and then the multi-electrode sensors of
ERT are connected to it by alligator like clips. Closer
the nails better the accuracy and all the nails should
be conducted evenly across the trunk touching
sapwood. The maximum number of nails that can be
connected to the trunk is 24 and the minimum is 8,
based on the size of the tree trunk. The other side of
the sensors are connected to the equipment, once the
test switch is on, electric impulse is generated and
passed on to the tree, the device scans the inner
conductance and resistance of the wood and displays
a histogram in the device, the file of a particular tree
at specific height is saved. Later, the data acquired
from the tree is uploaded to tree-specific Picus
Treetronic software for conducting further analysis.
The software displays the 3-D image tomogram of
the heartwood-sapwood demarcation, through
which the resistance and the growth diameter of the
Circumference/girth = 2πr, where, r = radius of the
tree
r = girth/2π
Once the radius of the tree is known by above
mentioned method, then,
Radius of the heartwood at breast height, is
calculated using the formula;
Heartwood radius = Radius of the tree - (Sapwood
depth + Bark thickness)
Heartwood Diameter = 2r
r = Heartwood Diameter/2
Heartwood diameter is expressed in terms of area
using the formula;
Basal area (BA) of heartwood = πr2 (cm2)
Where, r = radius of the heartwood (cm)
Volume of heartwood (V) is estimated using the
formula; V= BA*H
Where, BA = Basal area, H= Height of the bole.

Conclusions:
Sandalwood is valued for its heartwood, efficaciously up keeping and maintaining scented heartwood is very
significant. As scarcity is looming globally, proper way of growing this species with maximum heartwood
content can yield huge revenue for a farmer, therefore quantification should be conducted to analyze its growth,
to stall the harvest at wrong time. Various equipment have emerged in research field to conduct the analysis
which a farmer can make use of. In case he can’t afford these devices he may contact Institute of Wood Science and
Technology, Bangalore for further assistance and guidance.
91
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Anatomical, physical and mechanical
properties of Santalum album Linn.
(Sandalwood) and its various uses
S.R. Shukla*, S. Shashikala and M. Sujatha,
Wood Properties and Uses Division,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bengaluru.
*Email: srshukla@icfre.org
Wood properties:
General characteristics:
H
eartwood of Indian Sandalwood
(Santalum album L) is light brownish in
colour when freshly cut and it turns to
brown on exposure. Wirth further aging, it becomes
reddish brown. The specific gravity of the
heartwood varies from 0.87 to 0.91. Texture is very
fine and even; grain straight, sometimes wavy; dull
to somewhat lustrous, with oily feel; heartwood with
a strong fragrant scent that persists, without
characteristic taste.

minute. Fibres non-septate, inter-fibre pits
numerous, bordered. The rays are bi-seriate and
heterocellular composed of procumbent and upright
and/or square cells.
Physical and mechanical properties:
Very limited data is available on different physical
and mechanical properties and seasoning behaviour
of Sandalwood in the open literature. A few physical
and mechanical properties such as weight (at 12%
moisture content), static bending strength (modulus of
rupture-MOR), compressive strength parallel to grain
(maximum crushing stress) and nail holding power of
sapwood of sandalwood are reported by Purkayastha
(1985) in green and air-dry conditions and reproduced
in Table 1. It may be seen from this table that different
wood properties in air-dry condition are generally
higher compared to those tested in green condition.
The wood may be classified as heavy, hard and strong
in the dry condition. The sandalwood is reported to be
moderately refractory for air seasoning. The timber
seasons slowly without any visible faults. The
heartwood is rated as extremely durable while
sapwood is reported as treatable using the boric acid
diffusion process. The wood saws without much
difficulty and also works to a smooth, satin-like finish.
The sandalwood turns well and it is an excellent wood
for carving and inlay works.

Anatomical properties:
The photomicrographs showing the anatomical
structure of sandalwood in cross (transverse),
tangential longitudinal (TL) and radial longitudinal
(RL) sections are displayed in Figure 1. S. album is a
diffuse porous wood with small vessels visible under
hand lens. Growth rings are indistinct although faint,
closely spaced, concentric markings are discernible
on the transverse surface of the wood. Vessels are
exclusively solitary and are circular to oval in cross
sectional view. Heartwood vessels more commonly
open without much deposits. However, some vessels
contain tyloses. Microscopic observations showed
exclusively solitary vessels, perforation of vessels is
simple and pits alternate. Diffuse and diffuse-inaggregate parenchyma, chambered crystals in
parenchyma only. Pits to parenchyma and rays
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Anatomical structure of sandalwood (a) cross, (b) TL, (c) RL sections
(arrow in photomicrographs indicate the presence of crystals in parenchyma cells)
93
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Table 1: Properties of sapwood of sandalwood grown in Karnataka ation by pruning
Sl. Physical and mechanical properties
Condition at test
No.
Green
Air-dry
1
Basic specific gravity
(oven-dry weight / green volume)
0.75
2
Weight at 12% moisture content (kg/m3)
827
3
Static bending strength: modulus of rupture (MOR) (MPa)
85.12
107.38
4
Max. crushing stress (MCS) under compression parallel
to grain (MPa)
37.66
51.58
5
Surface hardness (kN)
Radial
6.84
7.40
Tangential
6.69
7.55
End
7.69
743
6
Nail holding power (kN)
Side grain
1.32
1.42
End grain
1.23
1.38
Sandalwood and its adulterants:
having similar external appearance to that of S. album
from other genus like Amyris balsamifera, Haldina
cordifolia, Buxus wallichiana, Drypetes porteri, Gardenia
latifolia, Mitragyna parvifolia are also referred as S.
album (sandalwood). The other potential adulterant
of sandalwood is Osyris species (Osyris lanceolata and
O. tenuifolia) from Santalaceae family. Many of these
species can only be differentiated from S. album
under microscope in wood anatomy laboratories.
The anatomical structures of different adulterants of
sandalwood are displayed in Figure 2. Although,
Osyris spp. has similar external resemblance and
gross structure/macroscopic structure, it can be
differentiated from S. album through minute
anatomical structure when viewed under
microscope.

Woods from different plant species referred as
sandalwood due to their external appearance, odour
and colour are passed on to the consumer in the name
of sandalwood by spraying or application of
sandalwood oil to the inferior woods due to its high
economic value. Other than Santalum album, some of
the oil yielding species of Santalum genus are S.
spicatum (from Australia), S. haleakalae, S.
paniculatum, S. ellipticum, S freycinetianum (from
Hawai), S. austrocaledonicum (from New Caledonia)
and S. yasi (from Fiji). Various unrelated plant
species having scented wood like Erythroxylum
monogynum (bastard sandal), Mansonia gagei
(kalamet), Ximenia Americana, Lansium
anamallayanum and other non- scented species
(a) Santalum spicatum
(a) Osyris spp.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
(b) Santalum spicatum
(b) Osyris spp.
94
(c) Santalum spicatum
(c) Osyris spp.

Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
(a) Buxus wallichiana
(b) Buxus wallichiana
(c) Buxus wallichiana
(a) Erythroxylum
(b) Erythroxylum
(c) Erythroxylum monogynum
monogynum
monogynum
Figure 2: Anatomical structure of adulterants of sandalwood (a) cross-section (b) TL
section, (c) RL section (Symbol ‘C’ in photomicrographs indicates the location of crystals)
Some of the wood or oil yielding trees such as Amyris
balsamifera, S. yasi, S. austro-caledonicum, S. spicatum,
S. lanceolatum are also mixed with genuine
sandalwood/oil. Only S. album trees yield high
quality sandalwood and oil whereas other species
from Santalum genus though yield oil, but the
quality of the wood and oil are not comparable with
Indian sandal wood/oil (Srinivasan, et.al. 1992). The
wood from S. album and its potential adulterants can
be differentiated by examining and comparing
various anatomical characters.. There is a need to
create database of wood anatomical features of
Santalum species available worldwide along with
other methods like chemical profiling, DNA
fingerprinting to distinguish the wood samples at
species level with more authenticity. This will not
only help in authentication of wood, to check the
malpractices being used in the markets, its trade and
also minimise the economic losses to the end users. In
this context, it is worth to specify that Institute of Wood
Science and Technology (IWST), Bangalore has the wellequipped laboratories to identify and authenticate the
sandalwood (S. album) using wood anatomical
characterization techniques (IAWA standards). This
institute also has the facilities to test quality of sandalwood
oil from solid wood blocks as well as increment cores using
wet chemistry techniques as per IS standards (IS 326).

References:
Purkayastha, S.K. (1985). Indian Woods: Their Identification, Properties and Uses, Vol. V. Controller of
Publications, Delhi. pp. 131-134.
Srinivasan, V.V., V.R. Sivaramakrishnan, C.R. Rangaswamy, H.S. Anantha Padmanabha and K.H. Shankara
Narayana (1992). Sandal (Santalum album Linn). ICFRE-M.1 The Director, IWST (ICFRE), Bangalore-560 003. Pp. 233.

95
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Wood structure of Indian Sandalwood:
Its adulterants and Key to Identification
Satish Kumar Sinha1, *, A. N. Arun Kumar2 and R. Vijendra Rao3,
College of Forestry, Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari. Gujarat.
2
Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bengaluru.
3
Scientist G (Retd.), Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bengaluru.
*Email id: sinhafri@gmail.com
1
Introduction
O
ver the years, the annual
p r o d u c t i o n o f
sandalwood has declined
significantly in India, while the
global demand has increased. This
growing gap between demand and
supply has raised the national and
international market price of
sandalwood. The Indian
sandalwood commands highest
price per tonne of wood due to its
superior oil quality. However to
meet the growing demand of
market for common traders after
adulterate the oil with cheaper
substitutes of this treasured tree
species. Unfortunately, due to hike
in price of sandalwood, some
dealers are even using polished and
scented wooden sticks of the most
inferior quality. Many timbers
similar to sandalwood in external
look are passed off by the
temporary application of
sandalwood oil. The buyer cannot
know, so frequently gets cheated.
Because of these problems, it is
essential to look for some reliable
means of identification of wood of
this valuable tree species from its
adulterants. Wood anatomy, a
branch of wood science and
technology which is generally used
to identify the timbers in order to
settle legal disputes besides many
applications. The macroscopic and
microscopic wood structures
including their general features are
the common basis of timber
identification (Plate1). In the
present article, the details of
general properties and gross structure of sandalwood, its adulterants
and key for identification are described.

Wood structure
The sapwood colour of sandalwood is white to pale yellow, nonfragrant and sharply distinguished from yellowish-brown to dark
brown, fragrant heartwood. The colour of heartwood turns darker
reddish-brown over time. Due to presence of oil in the heartwood, it has
very pleasant smell which lasts for several years. Wood is hard, heavy
(specific gravity of 0.87-0.92), dull to lustrous with oily touch, tasteless,
straight-grained to slightly wavy, very fine and even-textured.
The stem wood generally is diffuse-porous with very small to
extremely small pores/vessels, 25-50 per mm2, 26-50 µm in diameter,
mostly solitary and visible only under the microscope. Growth rings are
distinct or indistinct; when distinct, most evident at low magnifications,
8-10 rings per inch, delimited either by thick-walled latewood fibres or
crowded pores of small diameter alternating with scattered pores of
large diameter. Vessel members are 100-570 µm in length,
Intervascular pitting small 2-7 µm, perforation simple, empty or
occasionally filled with tyloses. Fibres are libriform and non-septate,
909-1517 µm in length, 13-22 µm in width with 3-6 µm cell-wall
thickness. Rays are fine to very fine, 7-11 per mm, heterogeneous,
uniseriate to biseriate, composed of procumbent cells, square and
upright cells, 22-41 µm in width and 107-373 µm in height. Axial
parenchyma is mostly apotracheal, diffuse to diffuse in aggregate,
occasionally filled with rhomboidal crystals either solitary or in 4-6
locules. Crystals are usually absent in rays and fibres.
Root wood is diffuse-porous with very small to extremely small
pores/vessels, 50-90 per mm2, 24-80 µm in diameter, mostly solitary,
round to oval and invisible by naked eyes in cross section. Growth rings
are indistinct. Vessel members are 144-512 µm in length, perforation
simple, intervascular pit size 3-6 µm, tyloses absent and no other
deposits. Fibres are libriform and non-septate, 661-1632 µm in length,
12-20 µm in diameter with 2-5 µm cell-wall thickness. Rays are fine to
very fine, 4-8 per mm, heterogeneous, uniseriate to biseriate, composed
of procumbent and upright cells, 24-41 µm in width and 140-272 µm in
height. Axial parenchyma is mostly apotracheal, diffuse to diffuse in
97
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Key to Identification
aggregate, infrequently filled with rhomboidal
crystals in chambered cells. Crystals are absent in
both rays and fibres.

It is difficult to differentiate between Indian
sandalwood and similar adulterants based on its
physical appearance. However, some unique wood
anatomical structures play a key role in identifying
the Indian sandalwood from its adulterants (Table 1).
Among fragrant adulterants of sandalwood, O.
lanceolata is distinguished from S. album due to the
presence of abundant rhomboidal crystals in ray cells
and dense accumulation of faint reddish extractives
in axial parenchyma of heartwood. In S. album
rhomboidal crystals are rarely found in ray cells and
heartwood extractives are yellowish and scanty in
axial parenchyma. The wood structure of O.
wightiana and E. monogynum are very similar to S.
album and they are rather difficult to distinguish on
the basis of wood anatomical structures and
fragrance. The heartwood aqueous extract of O.
wightiana is slightly reddish and the extract of E.
monogynum is almost colorless with faint reddishbrown tinge; however, the aqueous extract of S.
album is yellowish without any traces of red. The
wood of M. gagei is sweetly scented and
differentiated from S. album on the basis of presence
of storied rays, vessels, fibres and axial parenchyma.

Adulterants of Sandalwood
Due to high demand and soaring price for Indian
sandalwood, it is often adulterated with imported or
indigenous cheaper substitutes. These substitutes
are flooding into our Indian sandalwood oil industry
and affecting the superior quality of oil. Therefore,
the Indian government had to coerce a ban on import
of sandalwood. However, it is really difficult to
replace the sandalwood oil with a synthetic or
cheaper substitute due to presence of unique and
large number of essential oil molecules in the Indian
sandalwood.
The common fragrant sandalwood adulterants
available in commercial market of India are
‘Tanzanian or African sandalwood’ (Osyris lanceolata
Hochst. & Steud), Nepal sandalwood (Osyris
wightiana Wall. Ex Wight), Indian bastard
sandalwood (Erythroxylum monogynum Roxbs.) and
Bastard sandalwood (Mansonia gagei J.R. Drumm).
Moreover, some non-fragrant timbers are also
adulterated with sandalwood due to their fine
texture are Haldu (Haldina cordifolia (Roxb.)
Ridsdale), Kalam (Mitragyna parviflora (Roxb.)
Korth), Indian boxwood (Gardenia latifolia Ait),
Himalayan box (Buxus wallichiana Baill) and Indian
Dryptes (Drypetes porteri (Gamble) Pax & K. Hoffm.).
These species are passed through the temporary
application of sandalwood oil to make them fragrant.
As a result of these problems of adulteration, wood
identification key could be important to resolve such
issues.

Considering non-fragrant adulterants of
sandalwood, the heartwood of H. cordifolia, M.
parviflora, G. latifolia is odourless and vestured
intervascular pitting is present on the vessels, while
the heartwood of S. album is scented and nonvestured intervascular pitting is found on the vessels.
In case of B. wallichiana and D. porteri, the heartwood
is also odourless but the perforations in vessels are
scalariform. However, the perforations in vessels of S.
album are simple.

Key for identification of sandalwood from its adulterants
1
Wood fragrant
2
1
Wood non-fragrant
3
2
Rays, vessels, parenchyma and fibres storied
Mansonia gagei
2
Rays, vessels, parenchyma and fibres not storied; rhomboidal crystals
present in axial parenchyma and heartwood aqueous extract yellowish
Santalum album
2
Rays, vessels, parenchyma and fibres not storied; rhomboidal
crystals present in axial parenchyma and heartwood aqueous
extract colorless but with faint reddish-brown tinge
Erythroxylum
monogynum
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
98
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
2
Rays, vessels, parenchyma and fibres not storied and
rhomboidal crystals present in ray cells only
Osyris lanceolata
3
Vessel perforation mostly scalariform; intervascular pits non-vestured
4
3
Vessel perforation exclusively simple; intervascular pits vestured
5
4
Vessels very small, very numerous; crystals absent in
parenchyma and rays
Buxus wallichiana
4
Vessels small, very numerous; crystals present in rays
and rarely present in axial parenchyma
Drypetes porteri
5
Silica in rays frequent
Mitragyna parviflora
5
Silica in rays absent
6
6
6
2
Vessel frequency less than 40 per mm ; perforated ray cells present
2
Vessel frequency more than 60 per mm ; perforated ray cells absent
Haldina cordifolia
Gardenia latifolia
Conclusion:
Wood structure of stem and root of sandalwood looks anatomically similar except that in rootwood vessel
diameter is slightly bigger and more frequent. The wood of sandalwood can be differentiated from its adulterants
by analyzing the anatomical structures. It can usually be distinguished from Osyris lanceolata, O. wightiana and
Erythroxylum monogynum by absence of reddish tinge in aqueous extract of heartwood; Mansonia gagei by absence
of storied rays, vessels, fibres and axial parenchyma; Buxus sempervirens, Drypetes porteri by the absence of
scalariform perforations in vessels; and Haldina cordifolia, Mitragyna parviflora and Gardenia latifolia by absence of
vestured intervascular pitting.
Table 1: Distinguishable wood characteristics to identify Indian Sandalwood from its adulterants
Species
Tangential
Vessel
Type of
Ray
Ray
Ray height Rhomboidal
vessel
frequency perforation structure frequency (µm)/ No. of Crystals
diameter (µm) (per mm2)
plate
(per mm)
cells
Indian Sandalwood
26-50
25-50
Simple
1-2
7-11
107-373/
Present in
(Santalum album)
seriate
mostly
axial
Stemwood
10-18 cells parenchyma
Indian Sandal
24-80
50-90
Simple
1-2
4-8
140-272
Present in
(Santalum album)
seriate
axial
Rootwood
parenchyma
Fragrant adulterants of sandalwood
African sandalwood
60-90
Simple
1-3
Mostly
Present in
(Osyris lanceolata)
seriate
7-10 cells
ray cells
Indian bastard
50-80
26-52
Simple
1-3
Mostly
Present in
sandalwood
seriate
12-20 cells
axial
(Erythroxylum
parenchyma
monogynum)
Bastard sandalwood
35-65
85-96
Simple
Biseriate
9-13
210
Present in
(Mansonia gagei )
ray cells
Non-fragrant adulterants of sandalwood
Haldu
60-110
25-40
Simple
1-3
13-16
300-670
Absent
(Haldina cordifolia )
seriate
Kalam
60-120
20-25
Simple
1-4
12-17
450-650
Absent
(Mitragyna parviflora)
seriate
Indian boxwood
30-60
60-90
Simple
Uniseriate
12-16
400
Absent
(Gardenia latifolia )
Himalayan box(Buxus
45-50
130-180
Scalariform
1-3
9-14
450
Absent
wallichiana)
seriate
Indian Dryptes
30-55
100-180
Scalariform
1-3
16-18
Present in
(Drypetes porter)
seriate
ray cells
99
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Macroscopic view of transverse section of disc
Growth-ring delimited by thick-walled fibres and
crowded pores
Transverse section of stemwood (10x)
Transverse section of rootwood (10x)
Tangential longitudinal section of stemwood (10x)
Rhomboidal crystals present in chains of axial
parenchyma (40x)
Plate 1: Macroscopic and microscopic wood structures of Indian sandalwood
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
100
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
E- Protection System for valuable
Sandalwood Trees
V. Soundararajan* and G. Ravi Kumar,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology,
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru.
*Email: vsrajan@icfre.org
S
andalwood trees are being targeted by
smugglers causing huge losses to the forest
department and farmers. The development of
protocol for microchip based e-protection system for
Sandalwood will help to conserve and enhance the
status of these precious bio-resources of the country.
In this endeavor a collaborative research project was
initiated between the Institute of Wood Science and
Technology (IWST), Bengaluru and Hitachi India
Private Limited for finding the solution for
protection, detection and prevention of illicit felling
of high value tree species through e-Protection
system under Hitachi’s Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) funding. A Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) was signed between the
Institute of Wood Science and Technology (IWST),
Bengaluru and Hitachi India Private Limited,
Bengaluru at IWST to develop a protocol for
microchip based e-protection system for
sandalwood trees to protect, conserve and enhance
the status of these precious bio-resources of the
country.

challenge for the cultivation of Sandalwood. Special
steps for protecting the high value trees from being
cut and smuggled is the need of the hour. On these
strings of thinking there is a need for an automated
system for long lasting solution.
New idea of inserting microchip in sandalwood
trees is feasible for the protection of trees from illicit
felling. If there is any attempt to fell these precious
trees, an alert should come to the control station and
soon security official would reach the crime scene.
This technology has immense possibilities in the field
of research and development to produce more useful
security and monitoring system for security
applications (Soundararajan and Ravi Kumar, 2018).
Internet of Things (IoT) is the network of devices
contains electronics, software, actuators, and
connectivity which allow these things to connect,
interact and exchange data (wikipedia.org). The
convergence of IoT is expected to spread rapidly over
the coming years and this will unleash a new
dimension of services that improve productivity as
well as the quality of life of end users. The IoT has the
capacity to be a transformative force, positively
impacting the lives of millions worldwide (Porkodi
and Bhuvaneswari, 2014)
The Government of India estimates the
sandalwood market to be Rs 10,000 Crores annually
(approximately US$2 billion) and losing Crores of
rupees in smuggling as reported by police
department. Government is designing various
methods to control this menace of sandalwood
smuggling. In recent days, dog squads are used to
control illicit felling and smuggling of this precious
species. Due to over exploitation from the wild, and
lack of initiatives to raise the Sandalwood
plantations, sandalwood resource declined
worldwide. For monitoring large areas, using dog
squad is not giving expected results in combating the
smuggling activity and protect of sandalwood trees.
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh
and other state forest department are protecting
sandalwood trees through their own forest staff.
However, due to shortage of manpower the
smuggling of Sandalwood is continued to be a big
The IoT enables an opportunity for new
commercial security models to support mass global
protection system with which it can enable the next
string of wave in life-enhancing services across
several fundamental sectors. Device and application
behaviour will place new and varying demands on
mobile networks.
Long Range wide area network (LoRa) is a
patented digital wireless data communication
technology developed by Cycleo of Grenoble,
France, and acquired by Semtech in 2012. LoRa
enables very-long-range transmissions with low
power consumption (Ramon et al., 2018). LoRa can
101
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
be used over a wide range of frequencies from 137
MHz to 1020 MHz. This includes numerous licensefree ISM bands like 169 MHz, 433 MHz, 868 MHz and
915 MHz. This is a key enabler for inexpensive,
world-wide deployments and interoperability. In
India, the 865 MHz to 867 MHz license free band, as
per the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology directions (loriot.io;
ensembletech.in; thethingsnetwork.org).

Institute of Wood Science and
Technology has been initiated
for saving sandalwood tress
through the microchip based
e-protection system.
such as vibration and tilt and to communicate the
same with Gateway. Sensor also send daily health
message to Gateway.

Institute of Wood Science and Technology has
been initiated for saving sandalwood tress through
the microchip based e-protection system. This
microchip based solution is initiated to monitor trees
remotely using web interface and mobile app. Any
unauthorized attempt made to fell/damage a tree
will result in alarm to all registered devices.
Protection system required components are Sensors
(Tags), Gateway, Server with Web Admin Interface
and Mobile App (Android). Pictorial diagram
showing e-protection system is shown in Fig. 1.

A gateway is a hardware device that acts as a "gate"
between sensor and server. Gateway collects the
information such as Tree cut/tilt alerts, daily
attendance, etc. from the sensors and relay to the
Server.
A server is a device or a program that is dedicated
to managing network resources of protection system.
Servers are often referred to as dedicated because it
carry out hardly any other tasks apart from their
server tasks. Server is built with state of the art
technologies. Server software has capability to
handle more than one million trees. Server will
configure and monitor the WSN (Wireless Sensor
Network) and collect the information from the
Gateways and processes for the users.

Sensor (tags) means that it is part of a larger system
which will be provides input to a main control
system (like a Gateway, Sever, Processor or
Microcontroller) (electronicshub.org). Sensor is
designed based on microcontroller with
accelerometer and customized algorithms. It is
designed to detect various parameters of the assets
A mobile app or mobile application is software
application designed to run on a mobile device such
as a phone/tablet. Mobile applications for
monitoring the trees for users (Administrators) are
built on Android technology. Mobile App will be
downloaded from Google Play store. Mobile
Application is also having similar Graphic User
Interphase (GUI) interface as Server Web interface.
The microchips were initially been assembled and
installed in various tree species at IWST campus and
the parameters were optimized. Further refinements
were made as per the suggestions given by the
stakeholders. E-protection system was developed in
two phases.
In the first Phase, as a pilot study, 50 sensors have
been installed on sandalwood trees in the 25-acres of
IWST campus Malleshwaram, Bangalore and 25
sensors were installed at farmer field at
Nelamangala, Bangalore. The IoT sensors installed
on the trees are already sending information about
Fig 1: Pictorial diagram showing e-protection system
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
102
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Fig 3: Microchip based Protection System
Architecture (With Cellular Network)
Fig 2: Microchip based Protection
System Architecture
Fig 4: Installation of sensors on
Sandalwood Trees in (IWST Campus)
any disturbance and their location to users; the green
line shown in the picture depicts the outer boundary
of the campus. Communication protocol between the
Gateway and Microchip is working fine (Fig. 4).
In Second Phase, the sensor efficiency has been
effectively upgraded and the size of the microchips
has been reduced (65 × 45 × 10 mm to 56.65 × 24 ×
6mm) to smallest possible to suit for the high value
tree species like Indian Sandalwood.


Daily attendance feature has been added in the
server programme for monitoring the sensor,
control of Gateway, auto detection of gateway
health and dashboard.
The Camouflage microchip cover has been
redesigned to match almost completely with the
tree bark colour.

103

The mobile app has been upgraded to suit
common sharing to the new version of sensor and
redesign the SIM card based gateway. The
Communication between the modified
microchip and Gateway has been tested.
Significant achievement has been made in the
ranges of communication between the sensor and
gateway which has been increased from the 700
meter to 4 km radius.


Increased the overall capacity of Gateway which
is now capable to handle 100 sensor tags to more
than 1000 sensors.


Feasibility studies of the final version of sensors
and gateway at various agro-climatic regions for
the feasibility studies like signal range, weather
condition, heavy wind alert monitoring, etc. is
under progress. The height and depth of the trees
for fixing the microchip will be finalized
accordingly.


GPRS module based gateway established for
internet (SIM card slot).


Communication between Sensor and Gateway
integration with server and mobile App tested.


At Present 25 sensors have been installed on
sandalwood trees in the 25-acres of IWST campus
Malleshwaram, Bangalore.

Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
New Camouflage
New gateway
New sensor installed in the Tree
Road map for future improvements
National level which may cost approximately Rs.
1.5 Crore.

 Solar based power supply will be added.

The commercialization of technology will be a
source of revenue. This will also solve social concern
and problem of farmers and others, since it will cater
to the problems of the farmers and sandalwood and
other high value species growers.

 Capacity of the server will be increased and fullfledged system at IT Cell, Institute of Wood
Science and Technology, Bengaluru will be
established.
 IWST, Bengaluru will provide technical support
for safe and better insertion of microchip in
sandalwood and other high value trees.
 Around 5000 microchip will be installed in 50
different localities of agro climatic zones of
Southern India for checking of feasibility of the
solution.
 IWST will establish the Data Centre for Hosting eProtection System for its implementation at the
Demo of the Microchip Installation
Conclusion
Real time monitoring of high value trees using e-protection system will be a boon to forest departments and
sandalwood growers to protect their valuable trees till their harvest. The Wireless Sensor Network (WSN)
system was developed using the protocol (HAD2P) for unusual disturbance of the tree for monitoring and
detecting its illegal cutting. The colour code and sound alarm is generated initially on the mobile application and
thereby giving sufficient time to the user to prevent theft. Microchip based e-protection system has come out as a
practical and user friendly system for protecting Sandalwood trees both in forest and farmers fields. This new
idea of inserting chips in sandalwood trees is feasible, if there is an unusual movement of these precious trees, an
alert should come to the control station and soon security official would reach the particular place. This
technology has immense possibilities in the field of research and development can produce more useful security
and monitoring systems in mobile network and security applications.

Reference:
Porkodi, R, and Velumani, Bhuvaneswari, (2014), The Internet of Things (IoT) Applications and Communication
Enabling Technology Standards: An Overview. Proceedings – March 2014; International Conference on
Intelligent Computing Applications, ICICA 2014; 324-329. 10.1109/ICICA.2014.73.
Ramon Sanchez-Iborra, Jesus Sanchez-Gomez, Juan Ballesta-Viñas, Maria-Dolores Cano and Antonio F.
Skarmeta (2018), Performance Evaluation of LoRa Considering Scenario Conditions, Sensors 2018; 18(3): 772.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
104
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Historical and Cultural Significance of
Santalum album L. in India
Introduction
I
ndian sandalwood (Santalum
album L. Family: Santalaceae)
is an evergreen tree
commonly found in dry
deciduous forests of India. It can
reach a height of 20 m and attain a
girth of 2.5 m. It can grow from sea
level to 5000 m altitude and can
associate with more than 300
species of plants. It is an obligate
hemi-parasite, hardy species and
can adapt well in various agroclimatic conditions. It is popularly
known as white sandalwood, also
popular as “Dollar earning
parasite” (Krishnappa, 1972) and
its essential oil is ordained as
“Queen of essential oil”
(Radomiljac et al., 1998). It is
indigenous to peninsular India
and exploited rampantly for its
high economic worth. Indian
sandalwood is a highly valued
tree of global fame and is
acknowledged as Royal tree (Fox,
2000).

2. Historical and cultural
importance of Indian
sandalwood
2.1 Importance and uses of
sandalwood in different
times
Historically, sandalwood is
amalgamated with the Indian
heritage, culture and tradition
(Srinivasan et al., 1992).
Sandalwood is closely associated
Manohara T. N.* and Sandeep. C,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology,
Bengaluru.
*Email: manoharatn@icfre.org
with human civilization since time immemorial that has continued to
fascinate artists and craftsmen (Campbell, 1883; Kushalapa, 1998). The
single largest market segment for Indian sandalwood are the products and
applications meant for religious, ritual and ceremonial purposes. In Indian
culture, it is regarded with special reverence. Indians have a strong
spiritual association with sandalwood and the heartwood is burnt at
weddings and funerals. S. album is the state tree of Karnataka and
Karnataka is critically acclaimed as land of sandalwood (Gandhada Nadu),
while the region in and around 'Mysuru' is eulogized as a sandalwood
shrine (Gandhada Gudi) (Adkoli, 1977; Fox, 2000). Though S. album is
indigenous to Deccan plateau it is getting naturalized in other parts of
India and elsewhere (Sandeep et al., 2016). Indian sandalwood is idolized
in most religions especially Hinduism and Buddhism. Sandalwood is
used in every aspect of human life, especially in Indian culture and
civilizations as it is required from cradle to cremation. In India, it is used in
the production of attars from countless centuries. Attar is a blend of
sandalwood oil and flower oil, such as rose petal, jasmine, kewda and
others. The quality of attar is dependent on the concentration of flower
effervescence within sandalwood oil. Varieties of attar products are
produced in India and it forms an important constituent for the
manufacture of incense sticks and scented tobacco such as Pan Masala,
Zarada and Gutka. Its oil is used in perfumeries, soaps and toiletries,
ayurvedic and pharmaceutical applications.

2.2 Vedic and Indus valley period
From the times of Harappan civilization tree worshiping was
practiced in India. Indians were very well aware of medicinal
importance of plants and mastered the art of ayurvedic medicine since
Vedic period. Vedic and Indus valley period witnessed utilization of
sandalwood in the form of fine woodworking artifact or carving deities
(Fig. 1), ritual bathing of Hindu deities, temple construction material
and for ceremonial causes (Campbell, 1883; Adkoli, 1977). Its
importance in Indian culture is referred in Vedic literature, Puranas
(ancient Hindu texts eulogizing various deities), subhashitas (collection
of eloquent sayings written by ancient Sanskrit poets), mythology
(stories on supernatural beings and events) and in the ancient scriptures
(sacred writings). The Sanskrit manuscripts that are more than 4000
years old cite sandalwood oil as the oldest known perfumery material.
During the age of Yajur Veda sandalwood was used in sacrificial fires,
105
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
while the treaties of loud hymns in Rig Veda and
melodious hymns of Sama Veda give indirect
evidence of Indian sandalwood. It is cited even in the
oldest of Indian literatures such as Milinda Panha
(200 B.C.), Patanjali Mahabhasaya (100 B.C.), Dhamma
Pada, Anguttara Nikaya (The teachings of Buddha)
and Vinaya Pitaka (300-400 B.C.). In Milinda Panha
(Buddhist doctrine), Buddhist sage while referring to
the path of righteousness mentions that “No flower’s
scent can waft against the wind, not sandalwood’s, nor
musk’s, nor jasmine flowers. But the fragrance of the good
goes against the wind in all directions the good man’s
name pervades”. While describing ‘nibbana’ in Milinda
Panha the sage also mentions that “Like sandalwood, it
is hard to get, its fragrance is incomparable and it is praised
by good men”. The medical treatises of
Charaka and Susruta clearly gave the
detailed description of Indian
sandalwood and called it as ‘Sweta
Chandana’ (white sandalwood). Later
the name of ‘Sweta Chandana’ was
adopted and S. album was known by
the common name of white
sandalwood.

2.3 Sandalwood in Puranic
literature and Indian mythology
legend, Goddess Parvati created statue of a child
using turmeric and sandalwood paste. Later, the
statue was blessed to life and came to be known as
‘Lord Ganesha’ (God of intellect). In Bhagavata
Purana, an appreciation hymn mentions that Lord
Krishna and Lord Balarama on their way to Vrishni
Kingdom came across a dwarf named ‘Kubja’
carrying paste of sandalwood to a tyrant king named
Kamsa. It is narrated that the dwarf lady was blessed
by Lord Krishna to become a beautiful woman after
she applied the sandalwood paste to those two
divine brothers. According to ‘Panchatantra’ stories
(before 5th Century) Indian sandalwood was
endemic to the Malaya Mountains of southern India.
Indian sandalwood was utilized,
cultivated and traded by many
cultures throughout the world
since several hundreds of years. In
the Ramayana while referring to
river Tambrapani (Tamara Parni)
says that “river islands covered
with forests of sandalwood goes
down the sea as a beloved maid to
her lover”. In south India, it is
believed that possession of
healthy Indian sandalwood tree
in one’s garden would ward off
evil spirits, black magic and attract
wealth for the owner. Even today some households
in south India which are aware of this fact prefer to
plant sandalwood in their home gardens to prosper
wealth and are considered as a secret age-old
tradition.

Indian sandalwood
was utilized,
cultivated and traded
by many cultures
throughout the world
since several
hundreds of years.

Puranic literature occupies an
intermediate position and is believed to
be between Vedic age and the period of classical
literature. Vyasa Rishi mentioned about the usage of
Indian sandalwood in Puranas. In ancient Hindu
culture few trees have been associated with wisdom,
knowledge, hidden secrets and considered as sacred.
‘Agni Varta Purana’ gives the details of plants and
plant materials to be used during homa, havana and
other religious ceremonies. It is an important
ingredient in ‘homa/havana’ -a Hindu ritual
wherein offerings to the gods are made into a fire on
special occasions. Brahma Vaivarta Purana considers
the importance of Indian sandalwood and narrates
that Brahma created it through meditative
contemplation. In Brahma Vaivarta Purana it is
mentioned that ‘Goddess Lakshmi’ (Goddess of
wealth) resides in sandalwood, thus Indian
sandalwood tree is believed to be auspicious and
bringer of wealth. Vamana Purana recommends the
worship of ‘Lord Shiva’ with the beige-colored paste
of Indian sandalwood. Indian mythology cites
sandalwood in various instances and according to a
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
2.4 Indian sandalwood in various religious
practices
Sandalwood has high spiritual significance in
ritualistic practices and is used in the sacred fires of
Zoroastrian temples with a belief that it soothes the
troubles of all humanity. Egyptians and Ceylonese
used it for medicinal purposes, religious purposes and
for embalming mummies.Indian sandalwood incense
is the oldest type of incense used that dates back to
4000 years old (Adkoli, 1977). It is burnt during prayers
in Buddhist religion. It is mentioned as an item of
toiletry in Buddhist Jataka stories of 7th century
B.C.Herbalists believe that the fragrance emitted from
the sandalwood incense helps to promote an
atmosphere of open-mindedness, peace and spiritual
106
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Lord Buddha described Sandalwood tree as “Sandalwood, tagara, lotus, jasmine – the fragrance of
virtue is unrivalled by such kinds of perfume”
while Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore as
“The sandalwood tree as likely to prove, sweetest that can even
conquer hate, love and perfumes the cruel axe that lays it low”.
awareness. Sandalwood incense is used in Catholic
Church and Jewish Synagogues. Indian sandalwood
was one among the most treasured item of commerce
that was exported from India to Roman Empire. The
renown of sandalwood can be realized by the quotes of
Lord Buddha and Nobel Laureate Gurudev
Rabindranath Tagore. Lord Buddha described
Sandalwood tree as - “Sandalwood, tagara, lotus,
jasmine – the fragrance of virtue is unrivalled by such
kinds of perfume” while Gurudev Rabindranath
Tagore as “The sandalwood tree as likely to prove,
sweetest that can even conquer hate, love and
perfumes the cruel axe that lays it low”. The value of
this species is underlined with the fact that
sandalwood imparts fragrance even to the axe that
cuts it. More than half a tonne of Indian sandalwood is
required annually by Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam
(TTD)to conduct 'Snapana Thirumanjanam' (celestial
bath), pre-dawn ritual 'Suprabatham' and last seva
'Ekantha seva' of Lord Venkateshwara. To meet this
demand TTD has started growing its own sandalwood
spanning an area of 100 hectares near Parveta
Mandapam, 3 km from the actual shrine of Lord
Venkateshwara in Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh.
Likewise, Art of Living Foundation also has
plantations of Indian sandalwood in its premises.

more especially from places such as China, Arabia and
Europe. Thus, the global politics of resource
exploitation would always render the mantra of
sustainable resource use an ineffective strategy.
Sustainable use of resources has to be a global mantra;
else it would be a myth Kalidasa (5th century A.D.) in
his poem ‘Raghuvamsa’ referred sandalwood at
various citations. Trade, economic significance and
origin of sandalwood have been cited in the Periplus of
the Erythrean Sea (written in the 2nd century),
Kautilya described a variety of sandalwood in his
Arthasastra (200 B.C.), Panchatantra, KavyaMimamsa of Rajashekar (880 - 920 AD). Ilango- Adikal,
the Tamil poet quotes that Indian sandalwood
originated in the Southern Mountain (Malaya
Tenmalai Piranda Chandanam) (Srinivasan et al.,
1992). Ramaswamy (1956) reported that India is the
native of S. album and his observations were based on
the recorded history of its occurrence in India which
was of 2300 years old. From 13th to 18th century it
remained significant economic bioresource that led
dynasties for expeditions, warfare’s and invasions to
India (Ganeshaiah et al., 2007). The TTD, in India, daily
requires large quantities of sandalwood paste. A day
before the Brahmotsavam festival of Lord
Venkateshwara, interiors of the sanctum sanctorum
and the small shrines are smeared with a rich paste of
sandalwood. During the Brahmotsavam, while the
deity is around procession, the priests distribute
sandalwood powder used for the rituals to devotees en
route. Lord Venkateshwara is referred as ‘Chandana
Charchita Govinda’ (The English narrative would be
“The Lord of the untainted form, The Lord who is
beautiful and anointed by sandalwood paste, The
Lord who has body tint equal to that of cloud”). This
‘woody marvel’ was known to Indians for countless
centuries and South Western Ghats in India is
considered as its natural area of distribution
(Ramaswamy, 1956).

2.5 Indian sandalwood during anno domini
Sandalwood was eloquently protected bioresource
of India since Vijayanagara Period. Vijayanagara
Kingdom the super power and richest empire in the
world history had its glory because of its trade of
natural resources such as sandalwood, spices and
diamonds in exchange of guns and horses. The marvel,
glory, splendour, richness and audacity of the empire
was so overwhelmed that it started to gather
enormous interests among scholars, tourists, travellers
and merchants from nook and corner of the world
107
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
2.6 Factors leading to the decline of natural
populations of S. album in India
monopoly of Indian sandalwood and led to the
severe deterioration of sandalwood populations in
south India. Under the dictum, Indian sandalwood
Tipu sultan, de facto ruler of the kingdom of
was
declared as Royal tree. The states of Karnataka
Mysore, hailing from an Arab migrant tribe
and Tamil Nadu later ratified the mandate to keep
(Quraish) used to frequent Turkey and Afghanistan
sandalwood
under the control of their respective
for trade. Some researchers opined that Tipu never
governments. But this decree became a curse than a
hesitated to take the help of Afghans and French’s to
boon as it brought more harm than good as many legal
expel the one he hated and applied all sorts of
obligations were imposed on
strategies to get maximum
sandalwood cultivation.
Lord Venkateshwara is referred as
benefit from trades (Lafont,
Apart from this over
2001). However, historians
‘Chandana Charchita Govinda’
exploitation, frequent forest
and researchers admire him as
(The English narrative would be
f
ires, grazing, browsing;
a progressive king who “The Lord of the untainted form, The
unconventional monoculture
constantly looked out for best
Lord who is beautiful and anointed
eucalyptus
plantations, past
global technology for his
by sandalwood paste, The Lord who
cyclic epidemic of spike disease
Kingdom. Apart from his
has body tint equal to that of cloud”) c a u s e d b y p h y t o p l a s m a
ground breaking changes in
(Mycoplasma like organism)
economy from going cashless
and other biotic interferences (Fusarium, Pythium,
to modernizing warfare system with rocket
Rhizoctonia,
nematodes etc.) have further contributed
technology Tipu introduced a stock yard system for
to the dwindling of this species, both in area and
storage of sandalwood known as ‘Sandal Koti’ in 1799,
density. Its existence in natural stands has declined
Koti meaning stock-yard of sandalwood. At present
and is difficult to trace a greater number of
Sandal Koti can be located in Hunsur, Tirthahalli,
commercially exploitable sandalwood trees in the
Srirangapatana, Shivamogga, Bengaluru, Sagara,
forests
of Karnataka (Swaminathan, 1998). Fading
Hassana, Tarikere, Chikamagalur and Fraserpet.
populations of higher girth classes can be traced in the
During the times of Tipu sultan, Afghans, French and
protected
boundaries of governmental, nonTurks favored sandalwood. Thus, sandalwood trade
governmental organizations, institutions, farmlands
to Arabian countries was at its pinnacle during the rule
and homesteads in its natural as well as naturalized
of Tipu sultan. He coined names for various classes of
area
of distribution. India for decades dominated the
sandalwood using Afghan, Arabic and Turkish terms.
sandalwood oil production, but in the current scenario
Later in 1898, the Governments of Karnataka and
it
is importing sandalwood oil from foreign countries
Tamil Nadu recognized 18 grades of sandalwood for
(Dhanya et al., 2010). This alarming condition indicates
sale. Nevertheless, to establish a monopoly over
that there is a need to conserve this species and
Indian sandalwood Tipu Sultan created a dictum in
enhance
its abundance.
1792. The decree created by Tipu Sultan in 1792, started
Conclusion:
Indian sandalwood has been inseparable part of Indian culture and tradition. Its utilization has been witnessed
from the Indus valley civilization to the present modern era. Sandalwood tree is being grown in the home gardens
of many households in south Indian states. Traditionally, it is believed that growing S. album in one’s backyard
would bring prosperity in life (as Goddess Lakshmi resides in), wards off evil spirits and delete the harmful
effects of black magic. Thus, it could be said that this traditional belief knowingly or unknowingly has paved the
way for effective conservation of this flagship species. Furthermore, the present era has tremendous commercial
value for Indian sandalwood in National and International markets. S. album has always held important place not
only in Hindu religion but in almost all the religions. The Epics, Scriptures, Vedas, Puranas and Buddhist
literatures are contained with reference of the significance of S. album. The sacredness of S. album in also
witnessed in Indian mythology. All these factors signify its importance to mankind and should be considered for
conservation in its natural stands.

Reference: Contact the author at manoharatn@icfre.org
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
108
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood (Santalum album L.) Oil: Uses,
Adulteration and Detection Techniques
S. S. Bisht,
Wood Properties and Uses Division,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bengaluru.

Introduction
T
he Sandalwood oil is
extracted from
heartwood of stem and
root of Sandalwood (Santalum
album L.) tree. Sandalwood oil is
extracted by different methods
such as steam distillation, hydrodistillation, hydro steam
distillation and solvent extraction
methods. Among them Steam
distillation is the most common
method being used for extraction
of Sandalwood oil. The yield of oil
depends upon the age of the tree,
method of extraction and part of
the tree from which the oil is
extracted. Pure Indian
Sandalwood oil contains more
than 90% w/w of (free) alcohols.
The major chemical constituents of
Sandalwood oil are Z-α-santalol
(41-55 %) and Z-β-santalol (16-24
%). The quality of Sandalwood oil
depends on its chemical
composition due to which it has
the pleasant and characteristic
aroma.
Sandalwood oil is colourless to
golden yellow, clear, slightly
viscous liquid has high value due to
its long lasting, pleasant, smooth
and woody scent. Sandalwood oil
is the key ingredient of Indian
attars (or atar, which are oil-based
perfumes) because of its unique
capacity to absorb the characteristic
notes of other perfumes and it also
can enhance their perfumery status
and stability. The oil is also used as
a flavouring substance in food
Sandalwood and Sandalwood oil
General Steps in Extraction of Sandalwood Oil from Sandalwood
products such as frozen dairy desserts, candy, pan masala, baked food,
gelatin, puddings and alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages (Arun
Kumar et al, 2012). It has also been approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), Flavor and Extract Manufactures
Association (FEMA) and Council of Europe (COE) for food usage (Kraft
et al, 2000). Its use also has been reported in folk medicine with activities
against common colds, bronchitis, skin disorders, heart ailments,
general weakness, fever, infection of the urinary tract, inflammation of
the mouth and pharynx, liver and gallbladder complaints and other
maladies (Mishra & Dey, 2013).

Adulteration of sandalwood oil:
Excessive harvesting without reforestation of Sandalwood tree has
substantially reduced the availability of wood to the Sandalwood based
industry, resulting in global shortage and steep rise of market prices of
its wood and oil (Arun Kumar et al, 2012). As a result, the quality of
Sandalwood oil entering the trade is being compromised due to its
adulteration including substitution. Adulteration of oil leads to
inconsistency in its fragrance, medicinal and aromatherapy properties
(Misra & Dey, 2013).
Adulteration in Sandalwood oil is a common problem and comes in
109
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
of commercial oils confirm to
IS329:2004.

Nomenclature
considerations:
Naming Sandalwood is a
challenge for Sandalwood oil
producers and traders. Accurate
identification of the correct tree
Sandalwood Oil-Based Attar
Mysore Sandal Soap
species from wood is difficult
due to the existence of hybrids,
many ways, such as dilution of genuine oil with a
as well as different varieties depending on
cheap carrier oil or solvent, adding synthetic aroma
geographical locations. Notable members of
chemicals, or reconstructed oil with natural or
Santalum genus are Indian sandalwood (Santalum
synthetic chemicals. About 25 species, including
album), Australian sandalwood (Santalum spicatum).
species in other families (e.g. Amyris balsamifera L.,
S. ellipticum, S. freycinetianum, and S. paniculatum, the
Rutaceae) were traded as ‘sandalwood’. In addition,
Hawaiian sandal woods, which are used and
S. album oil may be substituted with oil from other
considered as high quality; however, these three
species for example S. spicatum which contains 38.7species were exploited between 1790 and 1825 before
46.1 % of total santalol (Lawrence 1991), or the oil
the supply of trees ran out. S. yasi known as
may be adulterated with synthetic or semi-synthetic
sandalwood from Fiji and Tonga, and S. spicatum
substitutes such as 3-methyl-5-(2,2,3-trimethylcyclofrom Australia are also being used as a source of
pent-3-en-1-yl) pentan-2-ol commonly known as
Sandalwood oil. Various unrelated plants from other
sandal pentanol or sandalore (Kraft et al, 2000).
genus with scented wood (viz.; Myoporum
Adulterations by fatty oils such as castor oil,
sandwicense - bastard sandalwood, false
peanut oil are easy to detect. On the other hand,
sandalwood; Osyris lanceolata - African sandalwood;
adulteration performed by an expert with the right
Osyris tenuifolia - east African sandalwood etc.) are
materials can be very difficult to identify and
also referred as sandalwood.
quantify (Lawrence, 1991). Adulteration of genuine
oil with (semi) synthetic additives influences
Analytical methods to detect adulteration:
physical and chemical properties of the oil. Health
The quality of Sandalwood oil is evaluated by
issues such as allergenic potential, carcinogenicity,
assessment of different physicochemical properties
damaging nervous system and reproductive organs
viz., colour and appearance, odour, relative density,
have been associated with the use of such additives.
optical
rotation, refractive index, esters content, total
Recently, a total of thirty-eight sandalwood oil
alcohol content, steam-distillation residue,
samples, including ten samples from heartwood of S.
miscibility,
the α-santalol and β-santalol content and
album and twenty-eight trade samples of
flash point as per Indian Standard (IS 329: 2004) or
Sandalwood oils were assessed at Institute of Wood
International Standard (ISO 3518:2002). Sandalwood
Science and Technology (IWST) for refractive index
oil is having a value in range for above
(RI), relative density (RD) and α- and β-santalol
physicochemical properties as per nature of
content (Bisht et al, 2020). The percentage of α- and βcomponents
present. This gives an idea about the
santalols in these samples ranged from 0 to 54.28 %
nature of particular oil or test sample. Generally,
and 0 to 25.94 % respectively. The oil samples with αsamples not falling in set range of specified limits are
and β-santalol content from 48.2 to 54.28 % and 19.15
doubted for presence of adulterants/mixing of cheap
to 25.94% respectively were comparable with pure
natural materials, or natural variations in
sandalwood oil as described in Indian Standard
composition
of a material.
(IS329-2004). It was observed that, less than one third
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
110
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Table 2: Requirement for Sandalwood Oil as per Indian standard &International Standard
S/N
I
Characteristics
Colour and appearance
ii
Odour
iii
iv
v
vi
Relative density
Optical rotation
Refractive index
Esters, calculated as
santalyl acetate % by
mass, Max
Total alcohol, calculated
as santalols % by mass, Min
Steam-distillation residue
for 10 h, % by mass, Max
Miscibility in ethanol,
70% (volume fraction) at 20° C
Chemical constituents
by GC analysisα- Santalol %
β-Santalol %
Flashpoint
vii
viii
ix
x
xi
As per IS 329
Nearly colourless to golden
yellow, somewhat viscous
oily liquid
Pleasant, sweet, woody and
persistent
0.963 5 to 0.977 5 at 27 °C
-20° to -15°
1.500 0 to 1.507 0 at 27 °C
As per ISO 3518
Colourless to golden
yellow, clear, slightly
viscous liquid
Characteristic, sweet,
woody & persistent
0.968 to 0.983 at 20 °C
-21° to -17°
1.503 to 1.509 at 20 °C
7
<5
90
90
5
-
-
<5
41 to 55
16 to 24
-
41 to 55
16 to 24
>200 °F (>93.3 °C)
Conclusion:
Adulteration and substitution of Indian Sandalwood oil is considered to be widespread. There are different
reasons for adulteration of sandalwood oil such as high production cost, low production output and
composition is easy to replicate by (i) addition of oils from other plants; (ii) addition of synthetic compounds. The
quality of Sandalwood oil should be evaluated as per Indian Standard (IS 329: 2004) or International Standard
(ISO 3518:2002) for different physicochemical properties viz., colour and appearance, odour, relative density,
optical rotation, refractive index, esters content, total alcohol content, steam-distillation residue, miscibility in
alcohol solution, the α-santalol and β-santalol content and flashpoint. One or a combination of these methods
can be utilised as a quality control procedure to authenticate oil and ensure a high quality ingredient. Further, it
is suggested that quality control and authentication for high valued Sandalwood oil should be strictly regulated
by regulatory bodies or certifying organisations.

Suggested Readings:
Arunkumar, A. N., Joshi, G., & Ram, H. M. (2012). Sandalwood: history, uses, present status and the future.
Current Science, 103(12):1408-1416.
Kraft P., Bajgrowicz J. A., Denis C., and Fráter G. (2000). Odds and Trends: Recent Developments in the
Chemistry of Odorants. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 39(17), 2980-3010.
Kuriakose S. and Joe H. (2012). Qualitative and quantitative analysis in sandalwood oils using near infrared
spectroscopy combined with chemometric techniques. Food chemistry, 135(1), 213-218.
Lawrence, B.M. (1991). Recent progress in essential oils. Perfum. Flavor. 16: 49-58.
Misra, B. B., Das, S. S., & Dey, S. (2013). Volatile profiling from heartwood of East Indian sandalwood tree. journal
of pharmacy research, 7(4), 299-303.
111
Sri. Naval Kedia,
President
e-mail: naval@costaawoods.com
Mob: +91 98302 00497
Sri. D. Ramakrishna,
General Secretary
e-mail: dwararamakrishna@gmail.com
Mob: +91 944017 6081
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Perfumery and pharmacological importance
of Indian Sandalwood and its
value added products
Introduction
T
h e o l f a c t o r y
characteristics of
Sandalwood oil from the
East Indian sandalwood tree
(Santalum album L.) is legendary
since the beginning of perfumery
and even now in the modern
fragrant world. The warm, sweet,
precious wood notes and the nondominating fixative characteristics
of the oil make it the ideal choice for
creating wide varieties of perfumes.
The fragrance of the oil and
heartwood are considered
invaluable in meditation practices.
Many substitutes have been tried for
sandalwood but in the end one can
only say that "sandalwood is the
wood" and there is no real substitute
for this royal perfume (Baldoviniet
al, 2011).
The value of a sandalwood tree
depends on t hree i mp ort a n t
characters (i) the volume of
heartwood; (ii) the concentration
and (iii) quality of its heartwood oil.
The amount of heartwood in a tree
varies considerably depending on
age, soil and climate conditions-and other factors not entirely
understood (Brand et al., 2012). The
essential oil found in the
heartwood of the trees start to form
at the age of around 10 years, and
trees can be usually harvested
around 25-28 years to get good
yield of oil. The volatile oil distilled
from Indian Sandalwood derived
B. S. Chandrashekar and G. Ravikumar*,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bengaluru.
* Retired Chief Technical Officer, IWST, Bengaluru.

from the heartwood is colorless to yellowish viscous liquid with heavy
sweet odour. The top note (the first aroma you smell) is very soft with a
sweet-woody, balsamic body note and a long-lasting bottom note which
makes this oil as a good fixative.

Pharmacological Importance:
Sandalwood
Traditionally, in the realm of mental and emotional therapeutics
sandalwood is used for treating stress, depression, stress anxiety and
nervous tension as it is both a sedative and tonic. It is thought to
naturally control anger and aggression and to act upon subtle emotional
centers to promote compassion and openness and enhances meditation,
this way; the healing process can be hastened as the person loses their
worries and discomfort.
About six novel sesquiterpenoids, two aromatic glycosides and several
neolignans identified from heartwood chips of sandalwood were
evaluated for both in vitro Epstein- Barr virus early antigen (EBV-EA)
activation in Raji cells, for assessing antitumor promoting activity and in
vivo two-stage carcinogenesis assays demonstrated its potent inhibitory
effect on EBV-EA activation, and also strongly suppressed two-stage
carcinogenesis on mouse skin (Kim et al., 2006). Two lignans obtained from
the heartwood of S. album, indicated apoptosis induced tumor cell
cytotoxicity against HL-60 human pro-myelocyticleukemia cells and A549
human lung adenocarcinoma cells, where IC50 values were determined to
be in the range of 1.5- 19.9 μM (Matsuo and Mimaki, 2010).
Indian Sandalwood encourages a deeper meditative mind, increasing
the parasympathetic nervous system of a person, rather than a
sympathetic nervous system response. “This relaxing oil has a
harmonizing and calming effect which reduces tension and confusion
and is ideal for use in depression, hectic daily lifestyles and states of fear,
stress, nervous exhaustion, and anxiety.”
Sandalwood oil
The sandalwood oil is one of the most valuable essential oils, valued
by perfumers for its woody notes, providing a deep rich base note to
perfumes and acting as a natural fixative. Sandalwood oil is known to
113
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
have extremely beneficial medicinal properties such
as:
awakens the divine thoughts within and promotes
profound relaxation.

Anti-inflammatory : Reduces pain, swelling
A detailed study of Sandalwood oil was carried
for antifungal activities against eight strains known
to be human pathogens and was found to be effective
against Microsporum canis, Trichophytonmenta
grophytes & T. rubrum. It has been reported that the
replication of Herpes simplex viruses is inhibited in
the presence of the sandalwood oil.

Antiphlogistic
: Useful to cure fever
Anti-septic
: Helps prevents infections
Diuretic
: Increases discharge of urine
Emollient
: Softens and soothes the skin.

Hypotensive
: Reduces blood pressure,
memory booster helps
improve memory
Sedative
It has been reported that the effects of inhalation of
Indian Sandalwood essential oil and its main
compound, alpha-santalol, increases physiological
: Has Calming effect reduces
anxiety, stress, and irritability
(Soundararajan et al, 2017).

Indian Sandalwood
encourages a deeper
meditative mind,
increasing the parasympathetic
nervous system of a person,
rather than a sympathetic
nervous system response
Sandalwood oil is still one of the main remedies
used in the Ayurvedic system of medicine. Asians
and Arabs use it in self-treatment for a great number of
diseases. Traditionally sandalwood has been used for
treating digestive complications arising from diarrhea,
nausea, colic and gastritis. It is listed as a carminative
and digestive muscle relaxant. Its antiseptic properties
have been successfully employed for treating
gonorrhea and leucorrhea. It has long been valued for
treating these types of genito-urinary infections.
Indigenous physicians observed that the oil and
heartwood possessed antispasmodic properties and
so utilized it for treating bronchitis, coughs, sore throat
and related diseases. Its use in treatment of skin
problems is legendary. It is an excellent moisturizer
and nourishes all skin types. It’s astringent, antiinflammatory, antiseptic, and pain relieving
properties have been put to good used in healing
wounds, scars, and acne. Applied to the forehead in
the form of a paste it has a cooling effect and is used to
bring down fevers. In cosmetic preparations it is
excellent for reducing wrinkles (Soundararajan et al,
2017).

parameters like blood oxygen saturation, respiration
rate, eye-blink rate, pulse rate, skin conductance, skin
temperature, surface electromyogram, and blood
pressure and self-rated arousal like alertness,
attentiveness, calmness, mood, relaxation and vigor
in humans.
Sandalwood Bark
The aqueous extract of air dried powdered bark of
Indian sandalwood in concentration of 25 to 1000
μg/ ml in phosphate buffer showed good inhibition
against virulent species, Staphylococcus aureus
(Shankaranaryanaet al, 1986).

Sandalwood essential oil has a cooling effect on the
brain and a calming effect on the mind. The sedative
properties of this oil guard the nervous system and
alleviate the off-putting effects of stress and other
negative feelings. For this invigorating reaction,
Sandalwood essential oil is celebrated as a perfect
meditation tool for more than thousands of years.
When used in the form of incense sticks, in diffusers,
burners or vaporizers this oil stimulates sensuality,
grants a sense of awareness, invokes tranquillity,
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
The Triterpenoid- urs-12-en 3 β-ylpalmitate (m.p
115-1160, (α) D 24 +200, C46H80O2) compound has
been isolated from sandalwood bark. The tropical
application of triterpenoiod on fresh pupae of forest
insects viz: Attevafabriciella, Eligma narcissus,
Eupterote geminate etc produced morphologically
defective adults indicating growth inhibition activity
of the compound. The extract of bark observed the
chemosterilant activity on freshly emerged moths of
Attevafabricella (Shankaranaryanaet al, 1986).
114
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood seed oil
lipid. Santalum album seed oil possesses excellent
stability and favourable physicochemical
characteristics and also pharmacological values
with great potential for various applications in
cosmetics and others such as anti-inflamatory
creams. Sandalwood seed oil finds use in treatment
of skin diseases. On pharmacological screening it
exhibited diuretic activity, antitremorogenic activity
and antiviral activity.

Sandalwood seed oil is fatty oil produced from the
seed kernel of the Sandalwood tree having different
properties than the essential oil obtained from the
heartwood of tree. Sandalwood seed oil is a natural
blend of Ximenynic acid and oleic acid with minor
quantities of other common fatty acids. Seed oil is a
reliable source of Santalbic acid (Ximenynic acid)
which is well known source of anti-inflammatory
Conclusion
Sandalwood, its valued oil and other sandalwood based value added products possess interesting
Pharmacological and perfumery potential. Future studies should pay attention to the possible use of essential
oils for specific purposes and also for various other valued uses. It has been recently stressed that, traditional
documented use, tribal non-documented use, and exhaustive literature search should be applied to synergize
efforts in drug discovery from plant sources and identification of appropriate candidate plants. Besides, drug
discovery and development need not always be confined to new molecular entities, but traditional herbal
formulations and botanical drug products with robust scientific evidence can also be alternatives, thus
accelerating the clinical candidate development using reverse pharmacology approaches.

References
Brand Jonathan E. & Norris, J., Len &Dumbrell, Ian. (2012). Estimated heartwood weights and oil concentrations
within 16-year-old Indian sandalwood (Santalum album) trees planted near Kununurra, Western Australia,
Australian Forestry, December 2012;75. 225-232.
Baldovini, N., Delasalle, C., and Joulain, D. (2011). Phytochemistry of the heartwood from fragrant Santalum
species: a review. Flavour and Fragrance Journal, 26, 7 26.
Kim, T.H., Ho, H., Takayasu, T., Tokuda, H., Machiguchi, M.T., (2006), New antitumor sesquiterpenoids from
Santalum album of Indian origin, Tetrahedron, 2006;62 (29):6981-6989.
Matsuo, Yukiko & Mimaki, Yoshihiro. (2010), Lignans from Santalum album and Their Cytotoxic Activities,
Chemical & pharmaceutical bulletin, 2010; 58(4):587-90
Shankaranaryana KH et al; Antibacterial Activity of Sandalwood bark Tannins against
Staphllococcusaureus,VanVigyan, 1986, 24(3&4): 120-121.
Shankaranaryana KH et al; insect growth inhibitor from the bark of Santalum album Phytochemistry, 1986, 19:
1239-1240.
Soundararajan, V., Ravi Kumar, G., Murugesan, K., Surendra Kumar, M. Srinivasa Rao, (2017),Gem of
Peninsular India: Sandalwood (Santalum album Linn), Publisher: Institute of Wood Science and Technology
(IWST), (Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE)), 18th Cross, Malleshwaram, Bangalore
– 560003, Karnataka, India.

115
Short term Courses offered by the
Advanced Woodworking Training Centre (AWTC)
The Advanced Woodworking Training Center (AWTC) is a premier training Centre is located in the heart of Bangalore
city. It was established by the Institute of Wood Science & Technology (IWST) as the first Training Center in India with
an aim to enhance skillset of manpower working in wood-based industries. So far AWTC has trained more than 2500
professionals. The courses are designed to give first-hand experience in handling advanced machines and tools to
work on various wood and wood products that meet the global standards.

Conventional Woodworking and Finishing (4 Weeks)
Admission Eligibility
Course Fee
Extra
Security Deposit
Intake
:
:
:
:
:
10th Class Pass.
Rs.15,000/- for entire course
Rs.1,650/- towards Accommodation Charges , Food Charges (as per actual)
Rs.5,000/- (Refundable) :
Maximum 5 Candidates per Batch
Maximum 20 Candidates per Batch
Product Designing and Development on CNC Router (4 Weeks)
Eligibility
Course Fee
Extra
Security Deposit
Intake
:
:
:
:
:
Completion of Conventional Woodworking and Finishing course at AWTC
Rs.20,000/- for entire course
Rs.1,650/- towards Accommodation Charges Food charges (as per actual)
Rs.5,000/- (Refundable)
Maximum 5 Candidates per Batch
Product Designing and Development on PYTHA 3D (2 Weeks)
Eligibility
Course Fee
Extra
Intake
:
:
:
:
Completion of Product Designing and Development on CNC Router at AWTC.
Rs.10, 000/- for entire course
Rs.1, 650/- towards Accommodation Charges, Food Charges: Extra (as per actual)
Maximum 5 Candidates per Batch.

Advanced Woodworking Training Centre
INSTITUTE OF WOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education)
An Autonomous Body of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of India
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru – 560 003, India Website: http://iwst.icfre.gov.in/awwtc/awwtc.htm
Ph: 080-22190148, 150Fax: 080-23340529 E-Mail: awtc_iwst@icfre.org,dir_iwst@icfre.org
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Potential Utilization of Sandalwood Seed Oil
Introduction
I
n India, the heartwood of
sandalwood has divine
status. The divine fragrance
of the sandalwood is said to be very
pleasing to the almighty, hence it is
used in anointing the divine idols in
Indian culture. The fragrance of
sandalwood and the religious life
of most of the Indians can hardly be
separated as it is required right
from sacred ceremonies to the last
rites of devote. In India, it's been
valued for at least 2,000 years as one
of the most sacred trees--an
important part of devotional rituals
and also as one of the most
important ingredient of a funeral
pyre in Hindu culture. The Indian
Sandalwood is known worldwide
because of its distinctive fragrant
oil and wood considering large
genetic distance between
provenances, it is concluded that
under diverse locality factors
Sandalwood adapts very well in
terms of growth, heartwood and oil
content (Jain et.al, 2003).
Sandalwood seed oil is a reliable
source of santalbic acid (Ximenynic
acid) which is well known source of
anti-inflammatory lipid. S. album
seed oil possesses excellent stability
and favourable physicochemical
characteristics and also pharmaco
logical values with great potential
for various applications in
cosmetics and others such as antiinflammatory creams. sandalwood
seed oil finds use in treatment of
skin diseases.
The seed oil on reaction with
zinc chloride yields a dark plastic
solid which when dissolved in
G. Ravikumar*, P. V. Somashekar**, and K. T. Chandrashekar,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bengaluru.
*Retired ACTO, **Retired CTO.

benzene forms an ideal base for insulation tapes. Seed oil reacts with
sulphur at 220°C yielding a dark sticky rubber like product and hence is
classified under vulcanisable oils. Resins like colophony (rosin) copal;
shellac etc. could be dissolved in seed oil at 200°C to produce an orange
coloured varnish. The highly resinous unsaponifiable matter
constituting 7 to 17% of oil could be easily separated byshaking seed oil
with cold dilute alkali and ethyl acetate (Shankaranarayana, 1988). By
partial hydrogenation i.e. reduction at the acetylenic bonds, using
Lindlar's catalyst, sandalwood seed oil could be converted into semidrying oil (Shankaranarayana, 1979). Four surface active products
having good foaming capacity and foam stability were prepared by
reaction of (i) dimethyl sulphate on sodium santalbate
(Shankaranarayana and Krishna Rao, 1982), (ii) seed oil with
diethanolamine, gelatinhydrolysate or sodium-ammonia
(Shankaranarayana and Parthasarathi, 1986). On pharmacological
screening, sandalwood seed oil was found to possess diuretic
hypotensive, antitremorogenic and antiviral activities (Desai and
Shankaranarayana, 1990). Seed oil finds use in treatment of skin diseases
(Kirtikar and Basu, 1987).

Chemistry of Sandalwood seed oil
Sandalwood seed oil is fatty oil produced from the seed kernel of the
Sandalwood tree having different properties than the essential oil
obtained from the heartwood of tree. Sandalwood seed oil is a natural
blend of Ximenynic acid and oleic acid with minor quantities of other
common fatty acids. Sandalwood seed oil contains 55-60% of a drying
oil highly rich in unsaponifiable matter (7-17%) rich in one of the rarest
fatty acids found in the plant kingdom. Sandalwood seeds from young
trees (aged around 10years) are as much potentially rich in fatty oil,
proteins and minerals as the seeds from the mature trees (age more than
30years) (Shankaranarayana, et al., 1990;Shankaranarayana and
Parthasarathi, 1985). It is viscous, slimy, pale greenish yellow, Refractive
Index. 1.479-1.488, Specific Gravity 0.9304-0.9430 Unsaponifiable matter
7-17%, Acid value 9-15, iodine value 145-159, Saponification value 185195.
Sandalwood seed oil contains a fat rich in santalbic acid (Ximenynic
acid), which is an acetylenic acid. Partial hydrogenation using Lindlar’s
catalyst has yielded an oil containing 80% of C18:1 and C18:2 fatty acids,
13% of C18:3, 6% C20 fatty acids and traces of Lauric acid(C12), Palmitic
acid (C16) Stearic acid (C18) fatty acids making it more semi drying oil in
the process (Shankaranarayana, 1979).

117
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Pharmacological Importance
varicose veins (Dhanushka, et al., 2012). Studies
have also shown that a highly purified ximenynic
acid increases cellular detoxification and antioxidation capacity. It leads to a strengthening of the
Extra Cellular Matrix (ECM), increases dermal
strength and improves skin elasticity(Vasundhara, et
al., 2015).

Initial pharmacological studies of seed oil of S.
spicatum reveal that it does not cause any toxicity or
pathological damage to mice, but reduces fat
deposition in adipose tissue. However increased
aspartate amino transferase enzyme in plasma
suggested an increased hepatic activity. Increased n3 and n-9 fatty acids and decreased arachidonic acid
(n-6) were also observed which suggested a
stimulation of the delta 9- desaturase enzyme.
Isolated ximenynic acid from S. acuminatum was
reported to have anti- inflammatory properties on
several rat peritoneal leukocytes. Further studies of
Ximenynic acid found it to alter the cytochrome P450 enzyme in rats, indicating a pharmacological
change in the hepatic metabolism (Dhanushka, et al.,
2012).Studies have also found that rats and mice that
consumed sandalwood seed oil deposited less fat on
adipose tissue (under the skin) than the control
group. Researchers have identified that ximenynic
acid produces micro-vascular constriction activity or
otherwise increased blood circulation in the skin. The
ethyl ester of ximenynic acid has been associated
with micro-vascular kinetic properties which could
be beneficial in treatment of cellulitis, hair loss and
Santalbic acid (trans11-octa-decen-9-yonic acid), a
major constituent of the seed inhibits gram positive
bacteria and several pathogenic fungi (Misra and
Dey, 2013). Studies on unusual acetylenic fatty acids
of Santalum seed oil genus began in the 1930s and
most of them were identified by comparison with
those found in seed oils of the Ximeniagenus
(Oleaceace), such as ximenynic acid, E-11- octadecen9ynoic acid, a long chain acetylenic fatty acid. This
rare ximenynic acid previously named santalbic
acid, was then identified and reported in various
genera of Santalaceae. Proximate and fatty acid
composition changes in developed sandalwood (S.
spicatum) seeds and separation and identification of
ximenynic acid isomers in this seed oil as their 4,4dimethyloxazoline derivatives have also been
studied (Butaud, et al., 2008).

Conclusion
On pharmacological screening sandalwood seed oil exhibited diuretic activity, anti tremorogenic activity and
antiviral activity. It produced prolonged fall in carotid blood pressure and increase in respiration when
administered intraperitoneally to adult healthy morgrel dogs anesthetized with pentobarbitone sodium (Desai,
et al., 1991).As the global demand for novel cosmetic agents is ever increasing, sandalwood seed oil could enter
the market as a cosmetic ingredient that could also act as a vehicle for other oil-soluble agents. Studies continue
on oxidative stability and pharmacological effects such as anti-inflammatory and cytotoxicity to extend
knowledge of sandalwood seed oil as an acceptable pharmaceutical and cosmetic ingredient (Dhanushka, et al.,
2012). Acetylenic acids such as ximenynic acid are known to interfere with fatty acid metabolism in a variety of
tissues. Seed oil of S. album may be a good source of ximenynic acid for cyclo-oxygenase and lipoxygenase
enzyme studies (Butaud, et al., 2008).
Research interest to evaluate its pharmacological and cosmetic potential has developed recently perhaps on
realization that sandalwood seed oil may contain novel chemicals that exhibit a wide range of pharmacological
cosmetic effects. Hence, more studies are required on phytochemical, cosmetic and pharmacological importance
of seed oil of this important species. This rare active oil can be formulated and delivered in a manner similar to
normal carrier oils. Having excellent stability and favourable physicochemical characteristics, Sandalwood Seed
Oil may offer the personal care formulator an exciting ingredient with anti-inflammatory activity on skin
together with the known emollient and nourishing properties of oleic acid (Hettiarachchi, et al., 2013).

References: Contact the author at ktchandrashekar2@gmail.com
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
118
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Variations in Growth, Heartwood and Oil Content
of Commercial Sandalwoods
M V Durai,
Institute of Wood Science & Technology,
Bengaluru.
Email: duraimv@gmail.com
Introduction
I
ndian sandalwood (Santalum
album L.) is recognised as one
of the most valuable wood in
the world. Due to dwindling of
mature sandalwood trees in its
natural range, the demand and price
of sandalwood products is
increasing year to year. It is reported
that the global sandalwood oil
market will be double in value over
the next five years, to USD 197
million by the end of 2026. Since,
both heartwood and oil of
sandalwood are marketable
products and its quality depends on
age of trees, determination of right
harvesting age is crucial for
maximum returns. Early studies
indicate that the harvesting age lies
between 15 and 30 years. The
harvesting age vary with site,
climate and genotypes of plant. The
paper aims to review the variations
in heartwood and oil content of
commercial sandalwoods.

dry sites. Sandalwood can grow more than 5 feet height in a year when
high inputs of water and manures provided (Fig 1). Further, a study
revealed that both height growth and survival per cent of plants,
produced from 10 different seed sources did not differ significantly. A
study revealed that Indian sandalwood trees, intensively managed with
fertiliser and suitable hosts, had highest growth rates, whereas the trees
grown in old fallow land had lowest growth rates.
The differences in early growth in trees (<10 years old) are likely to
continue in later years. The highest mean height, basal diameter and
diameter at breast height of 6-year-old sandalwood plantations are
6.0m, 12.7cm and 10.3cm, respectively, reported in south China. The
mean height and bole length of 16 years old trees grown in Vanuatu is 6.8
and 2.2 m, respectively. Mean stem diameter of the same is tapering at
rate 2.0, 0.2, 2.9, and 0.3 cm at five tree heights viz., 15 cm, 30 cm, 1.00 m
and 1.30 m from ground levels, respectively. S. album plants (2.5 x 2.5 m
spacing) have attained 3.14m height and 11.0 cm gbh at age of 6 years old
in Madhya Pradesh, India.

Growth statistics of
sandalwood
S. album is capable of growing in
all types of soils up to elevation of
1800 m from mean sea level, with
rainfall range, 500-5000mm.
Sandalwood grows very slow in in
natural habitat at rate of about 1.0
cm girth per year. However,
sandalwood trees can grow from 56 cm in girth per year in fertile soil
with moisture conditions. The
growth rate of sandalwood trees in
known age planation varies from 1
to 6 cm in wet site and 0.6 - 2.5 cm in
Fig 1(a). 1-year old sapling in field
Fig 1(b). 1-year old sapling in nursery
Heartwood formation and its variations
The price of sandalwood is largely determined by its heartwood
quality and santalol content of the oil. Knowing the time of heartwood
formation and its development in sandalwood tree is important, as it
helps to decide the rotation age for harvesting. Currently, very little
information is available on these aspects, especially for the sandalwood
trees grown in farm lands. The current knowledge on heartwood
formation suggests that as the secondary xylem ages, water conducting
119
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
tissues stop functioning when the tree ages, which
may lead to heartwood formation.

The mean girth and heartwood increment per year
at breast height is 1.0 cm and 0.2-1.0 kg per year,
respectively.

There is a misunderstanding that wounding can
initiate early heartwood in sandalwood trees. But the
wounding cause stress-induced development rather
than age-related development that forms true
heartwood. Among chemicals tested for heartwood
formation, ethylene is the only treatment, which
produced santalols on treated branches, this
confirmed the presumption that sandalwood oil is
produced by a regulated senescence process.
Further, it is suggested that 10-year trees are ideal
choice for heartwood initiation by artificial means.
However, environment induced stress plays vital
role in the promotion of heartwood development in
S. album. Though heartwood is found in all kinds of
soils, elevations and climates, certain trees produced
heartwood earlier than others in the same
environment and quantity of heartwood increase
steadily with girth classes. On an average, the
following heartwood yield is expected from different
girth classes under forest conditions (Table 2).

An Australian study too confirmed that there is a
strong association between the rate of heartwood
development and soil type, rainfall and the level of
sun exposure on the canopy of the sandalwood
found. Albeit as early as 1894 it had been recognized
that the tree attains a commercially profitable size
between 27 and 30 years, subsequent studies showed
interesting but contrasting results. The heartwood is
formed earlier in sandalwood trees where the trees
grown in a shallow soil or soil with high proportion
of stones, together with a distinct annual dry period,
and exposure to full sun. In a population, about 1520% of S. album trees have formed heartwood
naturally at age of 6th year. It is reported that a few S.
album trees in a plantation have developed
heartwood even at the age 4th year at Sholapuram,
Tanjavur, Tamil Nadu, of which one of them was
selected as a superior plus tree, a clone, SRC-I of
which was released for cultivation. The clone had
produced 8 kg of heartwood at age of 8 years old. It is
predicted that heartwood development may begin at
7.5 years, and increase at a rate of approximately 2.5
kg per year thereafter in S. album. As 8 years old tree
(Coleroon river banks, Tamil Nadu) produced 10kg
of heartwood and a 20 years old tree (Araku Valley,
Andhra Pradesh) had 40kg, it is presumed that an
average a tree can produce at least 1kg of heartwood
per year.

Table 2 Girth and heartwood yield
in Indian sandalwood
SL
No
Girth
Mean
class (cm) girth
Heartwood
yield (kg)
1
2
3
4
5
6
1-15
16-30
31-45
46-60
61-75
76-90
2.4
6.0
16.5
39.0
74.0
127.0
8
23
38
53
68
83
Rate of
Increment
(kg)
3.6
10.5
22.5
35.0
53.0
Rotation age of sandalwood varies with soil type.
For example, the expected harvest period is 15–20
years in shallow soil or stony soil and 30-40 years in
deep, fertile soil, high and evenly distributed rainfall
and a shaded canopy condition. Under suitable
growing conditions, heartwood formation starts
before trees attaining 10 years old, and produce
modest commercial quantities after 15–20 years. In
forest conditions, heartwood initiation starts at
around 10th year in S. album trees in India and to
reach their full maturity size at age 30–60 years. In
Australia, some private companies plan to harvest
the S. album trees at age 15 years due to high
maintenance cost and investors agreement.

An earlier study reported that a sample tree of 10
cm girth at breast height had a good percentage of
quality heartwood and another sapling, just 30 cm
away from the above, of the same girth, did not have
heartwood at all in Shenkottai forests, Tamil Nadu.
In a known age plantation, 5-10% of trees formed
heartwood at an early age of 8 years while 15-20% of
trees did not form heartwood even after 20 years.
This strongly indicates that differences in growth,
yield and colour of heartwood is mainly due to
genetic makeup of individual trees. However, it is
not clear that to what extent the climatic and edaphic
factors cause variations in heartwood and oil content.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Significant variation is found in heartwood
content, colour and quality within and between
120
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
sandalwood trees, which are influenced by the
growing environment1 and genotype. The
heartwood development and its quality are most
pronounced in the roots and base of the tree, and
gradually decrease towards the trunk and branches.
About 52% of heartwood is contained in the bottom
third of the 16-year-old tree bole (0 -1.00 m), while
17% of the same is recorded in the butt portion.
Quantity of heartwood production is not uniform in
all trees in a plantation, for example 3 trees had
24.3–30.2 kg of heartwood, 6 trees had only 0.3–1.0 kg
heartwood and another 3 trees had no heartwood.

it reduces the potential value of the tree due to
presences of knots at time of harvest. However,
pruning at an early age (years 2-3) can substantially
increase clean bole height and commercial value of
tree at harvest, by reducing the incidence of low
branching.
As heartwood and rotation age of sandalwood
differ environment, especially local climate and soil1,
the heartwood data and prediction model developed
of one location is not applicable to other areas for S.
austrocaledonicum and S. album stem diameter of S.
album trees at 30 cm above the ground is highly
correlated with total heartwood and heartwood
diameter of 16-year-old trees (r2 = 0.87), which
indicates that large-diameter trees had markedly
higher heartwood weights, but no clear correlation
was found between ground diameter and heartwood
proportion (r = 0.28) in 21-year-old sandalwood
plantation. Similarly, moderate correlation is
developed between heartwood (area and diameter)
and stem diameter of S. album natural populations
grown in West Timor, Indonesia. There is a strong
positive relationship between tree diameter and
heartwood diameter have been reported. However,
the stem diameter-heartwood relationship should be
used as guide only for S. album trees within a narrow
age range (15–17 years) with stem diameters between
10 cm and 35 cm at 30 cm above the ground due to
heartwood formation being a function of age, small
size of sample trees and genetics and environment
would also presumably play a part in heartwood
formation. However, sometimes, the yield of
sandalwood is un-predictable since surviving trees
contain as little as 10% of heartwood as against 5060% in the good trees.

About 22% of 16-year-old trees grown in
Kununurra (Australia) had heartwood at all five
sampling heights from ground level (0m) to 3 m stem
height and heartwood presence decreased up the stem
from 19.2 % at 0 m to 2.8% at 3 m height. The mean airdry weight of the same age trees is 5.8kg heartwood
tree−1 and 43.7 kg sapwood tree−1 at 12% moisture
content. The heartwood content is highly variable
between trees of a population. For example, mean
heartwood weight of largest trees is 24–30 kg, while
mean heartwood of other trees is 1kg/ tree. The total
predicted heartwood yield of S. album plantation (260
trees/ha) at age 16-years is 1.5 tonne ha−1 and
sapwood 11.41 t/ha. Mean heartwood yield of a 35
years old S. album tree (mean height =10.20 cm and gbh
= 83 cm) in West Bengal, India is 214.51 kg and mean
price of the same age tree in 2010 is Rs 1,90,000/- and a
largest tree fetches highest price, Rs 4,35,000/- with
heartwood yield of 415 kg. The earlier studies revealed
that about 70%, 13% and 20% of sampled trees in the
population failed to produce heartwood even at the
age of 10-14 years old.

Although, sandalwood is grown in almost all
states of India, the heartwood
formation and oil content are
not uniform with increasing
tree age due to difference in
environment and planting
material. Sometimes, growing
habit of sandalwood trees
determine time of heartwood
formation and its quality. Low
level branching is not only
restricting the development of
the heartwood into the canopy
Fig 2(a) Core extraction in 10-year-old tree
of the sandalwood tree, but also
121
Fig 2(b) Core of 10-year-old tree
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
and Marayoor) in India is nearly constant,
4.0% at 80cm gbh onwards and increase
marginally beyond 80cm gbh. Generally,
younger trees (<8 years old) yielded lower oil
and fragrance with santalol content than that
from mature wood (14-17-year-old). The total
oil yield in central and transition zone was
fairly consistent at 3.1% to 3.6% dry wt.
Transition zone contained an average of 36
mg/g dry wt. of oil while central heartwood
yielded 30 mg/g wt. of oil and no difference was
observed in either the yield or composition of oil
from both zones. The mean range of α-santalol
(44.4–50.1%) and β-santalol (18.3–20.4%)
concentrations in oil of 16 year old trees at the five
different heights from the ground are not
significantly different, but good enough to meet the
bench mark ISO standard of S. album (ISO 3518
2002E). Overall, the heartwood oil contained 46% αsantalol and 19.2% β-santalol, whereas the sapwood
oil had containing 58.5 % α-santalol and 19.5 βsantalol37. Total oil yield derived from sandalwood
trees vary from place to place, for instance, the
expected oil yield of S. album trees is 240kg/ha,
800kg/ha in Australia and 400 kg /ha from natural
forests in India. These differences may be partly due
to the choice of host species, watering regime and
tree density, age and growing environment.

Fig 2 c) & d) Wood cores of sandalwood grown in
agroforestry system in Karnataka (age: 3-11-year)
Variations in oil yield and its quality
Sandalwood oil, regarded as the queen of essential
oils and it is used in perfumes, cosmetics, flavours
and religious functions. Significant variation was
found in oil yield, colour and α and β santalol content
of sandalwood oil collected from different locations.
The yield and compositions of any essential oil are
strongly influenced by species, the age of the tree,
colour of heartwood, organ maturation, individual
tree, location within the tree, the environmental cues
and genotype. The brown colored heartwood of
S.album contains lesser oil (1.4-2.5% than light
coloured one (3.0-6.0%). However, it is yet to confirm
that whether these variations could be attributed by
tree age, genotype, environment or combinations
with certainty.
The higher quantity of finest fragrance
sandalwood with high oil content is obtained from
the driest region particularly on red or stony ground
than those grown in fertile tracts. It is found that
sandalwood trees growing on rocky soil and in
association with xerophytic conditions have higher
proportion of oil-bearing heartwood than those
growing on fertile soil enjoying good rainfall and
nourished by vigorous hosts, are not comparable
since rate of growth is exceedingly slow in the first
case while growth increment is rapid in the second
site. The oil content of heartwood of 6-year-old
sandalwood ranges from 0.66% to 1.76% and its oil
quality (santalols, 34.13% to 37.91%) failed to meet
the ISO standard for S. album oil. The heartwood of
young S. album trees (10years old; girth at breast
height (gbh) <50cm; ht. <10m) contains 0.2 – 2.0 % oil
and that from the mature trees (30-50 years old; gbh
>100cm; ht. 20m) contain 2.8 – 6.2%, with mean oil
content of S. album provenances (Bangalore, Thangli
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
The mean oil concentrations in the heartwood of
16-year-old trees at the five different bole heights
varies from 6.2% at 0 m and 2.9% at 3.00 m stem
height from the ground level with mean oil
concentration of 5%, this figure is close to that (6–7%)
obtained from mature natural trees growing in India,
and greater than that previously recorded near the
base of 14-y-old S. album trees growing at
Kununurra (2.9–4.4%) and Carnarvon (1.9–2.9%).
The estimated oil yield of 16-year-old trees ranged
from 0 to 1.61 kg oil tree–1, with a mean of 280 g oil
tree–1 and mean oil yield per ha is 73 kg oil ha–1,
whereas the mean sapwood of the same age trees had
0.1% oil concentration.
In fact, S. album contains relatively high oil content
(6-7%) compared with other sandalwood species, S.
yasi (5%) and S. austrocaledonicum (3-5). Oil quality of S.
album is also superior than other species with more
than 70% of total santalol, which give the distinct
aroma. The oil of 14-y-old S. album trees had 45 - 47%
122
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
α-santalol and 21–22% β-santalol. Although the oil
content of 14-y-old Australian sandalwood is
relatively low, it is still encouraging large scale
plantations in Australia as its oil quality meets the ISO
standards, ISO 3518 2002E. Similar variations in
heartwood diameter and oil content have found in the
20-year old S. album trees due to interaction of
genotype and environment. The oil content of 21-yearold sandal plantation in Hainan at 30 cm above ground
was 4.36% and its quality is on par with the ISO
standard, ISO3518:2002. Mean yield (%) of heartwood
and oil of 8–26 years old Santalum spicatum trees
(grown 400-600mm mean annual rainfall) increased
significantly with sandalwood age. Even if, the αsantalol content is less age-related, but it was noted
high in 26-year tree. Normally, both oil and α-santalol
concentrations are relatively high in the butt, roots and
1st grade wood of mature trees (14-26 years old).
Among sandalwood grades, 1st grade accounts for the
33–46% of the total weight of commercial wood and
rest is 10–23% of the total. Based on the above-said
results, it is suggested that sandalwood tree may need
retained at least 25 years to get maximum quantity of
high-grade heartwood and prime quality oil.
Although both Indian and Australian
sandalwood oils contain similar chemical
constituents, the Australian Sandalwood oil differ
with low level of α-santalol and β-santalol and
presence of E, E-farnesol and α-bisabolol. Qualitative
co-occurrence alpha-santalol and β-santalol was
found in sandalwood oil and both have a strong
positive linear correlation (r=0.99) when peak area
used. Sapwood contained almost no extractable oil
and α- santalol occasionally present in oil. The
extractable oil yield was compared to the proportion of
heartwood in cores. Despite the general trend, many
samples of even 15-year-old trees yielded very little
fragrant heartwood. Therefore, there are several
factors involved in formation and development of oils
within heartwood undoubtedly contribute to these
variations in this relationship and these in turn may be
related to growing conditions, host plants and
genotype. If the mean weight of heartwood per tree
and oil concentration are known, yields and the
potential value of other trees grown in similar
environment can be estimated.

Conclusions
While natural sandalwood reserves are dwindling very fast in almost all sandalwood growing areas due to
overexploitation and illegal harvesting, the area under commercial sandalwood cultivation is being increasing
rapidly in all sandalwood growing countries. The plantation grown sandalwood would replace or supplement
the wild supply of sandalwood in near future. As the quality of farmland grown sandalwood is inferior than that
grown in wild, it is suggested to have the longer rotation, i.e., 20-30 years to improve yield and quality of
sandalwood oil. Earlier reports say that about 13% - 70% of sampled trees in the population failed to produce
heartwood even at the age of 10-14 years old. Sandalwood trees growing on rocky soil with xerophytic conditions
have higher proportion of oil-bearing heartwood than those growing on fertile soil. The heartwood formation
and oil quality of sandalwood depend upon edaphic, climatic factors and genetic makeup of sandalwood.

Further reading
Page, T., Southwell, I., Russell, M., Leakey, R. 2007. Evaluation of heartwood and oil Characters in seven
populations of Santalum lanceolatum from Cape York.
Brand, J.E., Norris, L.J., Dumbrell, I.C., Estimated heartwood weights and oil concentrations within 16-year-old
Indian sandalwood (Santalum album) trees planted near Kununurra, Western Australia. Australian Forestry,
2012, 75, 225–232.
Barbour, L. 2020. Enhancing the formation of heartwood in Sandalwood in Vanuatu. Australian Centre for
International Agricultural Research, ACIR Publication, Final report NoFR2020-021, Kingston, ACT, Australia.
Srimathi, R. A. and Kulkarni, H. D.1980. Preliminary findings of the heartwood formation in sandal (Santalum
album L.). In Proceedings of Second Forestry Conference, FRI and Colleges, Dehra Dun, 1980, pp. 1–13.

123
Company Background:
KumarEngineeringCo. is a pioneer in India for making indigenous global standard machines being used in
the wood working industries as Plywood, Laminate & Furniture, Founded in 1990 by Mr. Sunil Srivastava
(M.D.) on Engineering graduate with breakthrough experience in advance automation with strong focus on
research and development, our organization is recognized worldwide for technical excellence and development
of innovative products. The numerous industry milestones, new products, technical upgradations and patents
that have resulted from our work continue to provide long-term benefits to our clients.
We are ISO: 9001 2015 certified company located in NCR District Rohtak, Haryana, approximately 40 miles
from the capital city of New Delhi and easily accessible from the airports.

Core Competencies:














Double Head Wide Belt Top Sanding Machine
Double Head Wide Belt Bottom Sanding Machine
Heavy Duty Both Side Sanding Machine
Triple Head Calibrating and Sanding Machine
Heavy Duty Laminate Sanding Machine
Heavy Duty Both Side Calibrating Machine
Super Heavy Duty Both Side Calibrating Machine
Single Combi Head Sanding Machine
Single Head Calibrating Machine
Double Head Both Side Brushing Machine
Triple Head Both Side Brushing Machine
Automatic Edge Cutting Machine (ServoControlled)
Hardwood Calibrating & Sanding Machine.
Sanding Machine with Cross Belt for UV/Lacquer.

Our Clients:
We have a diversified client base & enjoy strong patronage of 500+ national & international clients including
leading Plywood, MDF, Laminate and other wood-based product manufacturers, research organizations and
government agencies. Apart from pan-India presence our machines are being increasingly exported to Nepal
and preparing for other neighboring countries.
We look forward to receiving your esteemed order and forging a strong relationship with you. Please feel free to
contact us for more information
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood Resources in India:
A Review on Conservation and Policy Issues
Introduction
S
antalum album, the Indian
Sandalwood, produces
highly aromatic oil and the
price of which is skyrocketing in the
global perfumery market. The oil
has an important place in the
indigenous system of medicine.
Markets worldwide are currently
facing a serious shortage of this
increasingly expensive, high
quality Indian sandalwood
(Santalum album) – largely as a
result of unsustainable harvesting
of the species over a long period of
time in its native environments of
India. East Indian sandalwood, S.
album is sought after by perfumery
and allied industries for the
supreme quality essential oil.

Conservation status of
sandalwood species
Sandalwood is widely
distributed in Southern parts of
peninsular India. The value of
sandalwood was realized as early
as 1792 when Tipu Sultan the then
ruler of Mysore declared it as a
“Royal Tree”. Due to this historical
reason sandalwood has ever since
remained under government
control. It is defined as a “forest
produce”, although it does not
have any special provisions under
“Indian Forest Act”. Sandalwood
resource in India especially wild
population is currently threatened
mainly because of illicit felling,
forest fire and grazing and to a
certain extent spike disease
coupled with heavy domestic and
G. Ravikumar and Chandraprabha*,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Malleswaram, Bengaluru.
* State Consultant, Karnataka Forest Department,
Aranya Bhavan, Bengaluru.

international demand with inadequate uniform regulation in the
Southern states especially in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala.
Smuggling of Sandalwood has created socio-economic and law and
order problems in all Sandalwood producing states.

Recent policy initiatives of sandalwood
The legal hassles created by sandalwood trade regulation results from
the fact that there is no comprehensive regulation applicable to the entire
country. Hence, clandestine trade is flourishing and sandalwood
population declining to the extent that it is on the verge of extinction.
Sandalwood is included in the Red List of International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as vulnerable and sandalwood growing
states of India have stated that it faces extinction. India realised the value
of sandalwood trade and took positive steps to protect the natural
population of sandalwood. Measures to sustain this valued bio
resources, took prominence and flaws in policy which endangered the
species were amended. Government of Karnataka promulgated an
amendment to Karnataka Forest Act in 2001 to encourage private
domestication of sandalwood as a means to conserve and enhance the
status of this resource. The amendment gave landowners full legal right
to trees on their land, made them eligible to receive full value on
extraction and made amendments on the sale of Sandalwood through
Forest Dept. & Govt. Departments. Tamil Nadu followed path with the
Tamil Nadu Forest (Amendment) Act in 2002, the landowners were
given the right to trees (Dhanya et al, 2010). Subsequently, Kerala Forest
(Amendment) Act in 2010 regulated cutting and possession of
sandalwood. India thus remains competitive in its attempt to grow
more sandalwood both in-situ & ex-situ by inter plantation methods to
bring back its lost glory. It is hoped that this initiative will meet both
domestic and international market demands.

Production and utilization of sandalwood
Ecologically sandalwood has adapted to various agro climatic and
soil conditions for in-situ regeneration. Heartwood yield again depends
upon locality and age of tree. There has been a significant reduction in
production of sandalwood during the past years. Production of
heartwood during 1930s through 1950s was around 4000 tons a year,
125
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Table 1. Comparison of oil content among different Santalum species
Species
S. album
Origin
India, Indonesia
Oil content (%)
6–7
S. yasi
Fiji
S. austrocaledonicum
Vanuatu, New Caledonia
S. spicatum
Western Australia
5
3–5
2
Santalol content
α-santalol: 41-55%
β-santalol: 16-24%
α-santalol: 37-39%
β-santalol: 26-28%
α-santalol: 48-49%
β-santalol: 20-22%
α-santalol: 15-25%
β-santalol: 5-20%
Source: AAG (2006)
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
126
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Certification system
and product
standardisation are
critical elements of
supplier–buyer
chains, particularly in
high-value European
sandalwood markets.

References
1
Dhanya, B., Viswanath, S., Purushothman, S. 2010. Sandal (Santalum album L.) conservation in southern
India: A review of policies and their impacts Journal of Tropical Agriculture 48(1–2):1–10, 2010
127
Association of Timber Importers, Traders, Saw Mill
Owners, Plywood & Veneer Manufacturers
MANAGING COMMITTEE
Shri Navnit R. Gajjar
President
Shri Hemchandra B. Yadav
Vice President
Shri Swaminath Dubey
Hon. Secretary
Shri Saurabh Agarwal
Joint Secretary
Shri Bharat H. Patel
Hon. Treasurer
Shri Parveen Bansal
Joint Treasurer
Timber Bhavan: Plot No. – 47, Sector-8,Gandhidham - Kutch - Gujarat 370 201
Phone: 02836-230676, 232613
Telefax: 02836-222337, E-mail: kata.gdm@gmail.comi
Web: www.kandlatimber.org
Azim Sheikh 9925228799
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Production and Trade of Commercial
Sandalwoods – An Overview
M. V. Durai,
Institute of Wood Science & Technology,
Bengaluru.
Email: duraimv@gmail.com
Introduction
T
he East Indian sandal
wood (Santalum album L.)
is recognised as the most
valuable wood in the world due to
its high heartwood, quality of oil
and high demand in international
markets. . Many state governments
have liberalized the policy to
promote sandalwood cultivation
due to dwindling of mature
sandalwood trees in forests. As a
result of recent policy changes in
respect of liberalization on
sandalwood cultivation in India,
many progressive farmers and tree
growers have started cultivating
sandalwood in large scale since
2001. Although global sandalwood
market has been strong for many
centuries and its price has gone up
manyfold, prospective farmers and
sandalwood growers are sceptical
about future market trends with
respect to its price. Considering the
ambiguities among farmers with
respect to trading of sandalwood,
in this paper, an attempt is made to
review production and market
outlook of sandalwood.

Commercial sandalwood
species
There are 17 species, 14 varieties,
and one extinct species reported
under the genus, “Santalum”. The
sandalwood species are generally
distributed in tropical South
Eastern region of Southern
hemisphere between 30ºN and
40ºS. Of these, S. album, S.

austrocaledonicum, S. insulare, S. lanceolatum, S. macgregorii, S. spicatum
and S. yasi are commercially important species. Among all, S. album is
highly demanded and priced one in the international market due to its
high-quality oil and used as a primum standards to compare that of
other sandalwood oils. The information on distribution and trade status
of commercial sandalwood species is given in the Table 1.
Table 1 Commercial sandalwood species in international trade
Sl Species
No
Distribution
Trade status in the market
1
Santalum album
(East Indian
sandalwood)
Indonesia, India,
Sri Lanka and
Timor-Leste
Most highly regarded
species. Oil used for
International Standardization
(ISO – 3518:2002)
2
South-western
Santalum
spicatum
Australia
(West Australian
sandalwood)
One of the most traded
sandalwoods.
Oil (ISO 22769:2009) has
relatively low santalols, and
high E, E farnesol content
(allergen in cosmetics).

3
New Caledonia
Santalum
austrocaledonicum and Vanuatu
Oil quality varies with some
populations.
High-quality oils is similar to
S.album
4
Santalum yasi
Fiji, Niue and
Tonga
Produces excellent quality
heartwood and high-quality
oil (α-santalols:34-40% and βsantalols: 29–31%)
Oil quality is slightly lower
than S.album
5
Santalum
paniculatum
Hawaii
Oil quality is satisfactory and
high proportions of αsantalols (up to 40%) and βsantalols (up to 16%)
6
Santalum
macgregorii
Papua New
Guinea
Poor quality oil
7
Santalum
insulare
French Polynesia
and the Cook
Islands
Overall oil quality is
satisfactory
129
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Despite S. album and S. yasi are
distributed in the large geographic
disjunction, they are closely related
and presumed to have developed
from a common ancestor in
northern Australia about three
million years ago. Further, it is
reported that both closely related
species (S. album and S. yasi) as well
as quite distantly related species (S.
album and S. austrocaledonicum)
species freely hybridize readily
each other when they grow
together.

8
Santalum
lanceolatum
Northern
Australia
Oil is inferior quality
9
Santalum
leptocladum
Southerly
subpopulation
(latitudes above
20°S) of S.
lanceolatum
-
Southern,
eastern and
northern Africa
and also in
southern Europe
and in Asia,
from China to
India, and on
Socotra, Yemen
Inferior quality heartwood
with low santalols (<10%)
10 Osyris
lanceolata
Production of sandalwood
There is a paradigm shift
underway in all traditional
sandalwood growing areas, such
that domestic sandalwood
plantations will replace sandalwood
resources in the natural habitats due
to commercial extinction of most
widely traded sandalwood species
in its native range with exception of
S. spicatum (Western Australia) and
S. austrocaledonicum (New
Caledonia). Supply of sandalwood
from commercial plantations of S.
album, S. austrocaledonicum, S.
spicatum and S. yasi may overtake
and supplement the supply of
sandalwood from natural habitat in
the next 10-15 years. However, the
production and prospect of
sandalwood trade differ from
country to country due to prevailing
socio-economic and political
conditions (Table 5).

East Indian sandalwood
India
Among commercial sandal
woods, S. album is regarded as most
valuable one since ancient times
due to its inherent quality of high α-
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
and β-santalol content in the oil. Currently, S. album account for about
95% of total global production. However, the supply of S. album has
declined over the past 10-15 years, reportedly due to illegal harvesting
and the prevalence of spike disease in India. Tamil Nadu, one of the
main producer states in India, was produced about 2000 MT of
heartwood per year during the early 1980s and the auctioned heartwood
has declined to 1400 MT in 2003 and further to 300 MT in 2013 due to
dwindling of mature sandal trees in the natural habitat. India currently
produces about 400 MT of sandalwood annually supply from India
remains variable, even though supply fell to just 250 tonnes of wood a
year in 2016 from almost 4,000 tonnes a year in 1970
(www.bloomberg.com). According to Thomson (2020), sustainable
harvest from wild sandalwood stands in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and
Kerala is likely to be modest (e.g., 2000 MT of heartwood per year, but
more likely only 1000 MT).
The monopoly of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over sandalwood may
end in near future, as other states are keen in taking up cultivation in
large scale. Already, Government of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra and Goa state have relaxed the centuries-old restrictions
on sandalwood cultivation and other states are in line for promoting
sandal wood cultivation in farm lands. Due to high market price and the
pro-sandalwood policy, the farmers are keen to cultivate sandalwood in
large scale in farmlands along with food crops, horticultural crops and
timber species as sandalwood-based agroforestry. Many private
agencies, especially real estate developers and progressive farmers
started in raising sandalwood plantations in large scale in India
including non-traditional sandalwood areas, viz., Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan.

130
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Currently, the area under sandalwood in farm lands
has grown dramatically to an estimated 30,000 ha in
2019, with the majority of the plantings in Gujarat
(20,000ha) and Karnataka (12,000ha) States. The area
under sandalwood cultivation is growing at rate of
600 ha per year (Pallavi, 2015). The estimated yield is
8 MT heartwood per ha on a 25–30-year rotation. Of
late many real estate or property developers are also
showing keen interest in establishment of large-scale
sandal plantations (100 acres) in A.P., and Telangana
as it enhances value of the properties. India would
once again become a major producer of S. album in
the world, if plantations are established with
superior genotypes and improved silviculture and
re-emergence of spike disease controlled.

Australia. Quintis, the largest Indian sandalwood
(S. album) Company in the world, currently it
manages an area of about 12,564 ha (with about 5.5
million S. album trees) in northern Australia. The
other major S. album producer in Australia, are
Santanol Pty Ltd., and TFS. The TFS plans to increase
output by 30-fold to 10,000 tons of timber a year from
its 30,000 acres of plantations in Western Australia
and completed its first commercial harvest in 2014
according to its website. The total Indian
sandalwood area has increased from 50 ha in 1999 to
7,000 ha in 2012.
Australia is also a major producer of low quality
sandalwoods such as S. spicatum and S. lanceolatum.
The Forests Products Commission, Australia has
harvested about 2,150 MT each year and about 1,500
MT of powdered sandalwood is exported to
agarbatti industry in Asia and Middle East. Besides
this, about 500 MT sandalwood exported as pregrind, and unprocessed for carving and furniture. In
2008, about 12,000 ha of S. spicatum had been planted
and by 2014 this had increased to 20,000 ha. The
commercial rotation period for S. spicatum in arid
zones in likely to be 30-35 years (cf. 15-17 years for
irrigated S. album) with a yield of 3-4 MT of
heartwood per ha. The guesstimated current annual
production of S. lanceolatum from the wild is 150-250
MT of heartwood. However, the surge of illegal
harvesting and dumping of low-grade S. spicatum
powders into the market are major challenges for
sustainable production of wild S. spicatum. The
estimated supply of marketable oil from recently
established plantations is expected to rise
substantially from 2019 when harvesting begins.
Although, the santalol content in S. spicatum is lower
than that in S. album, there is still strong demand for
its oil. Further, the oil quality of heartwood derived
from its future plantations is likely to be improved
with help of improved planting materials.

Indonesia
In Indonesia, sandalwood reserves in natural
forest areas have declined significantly due to lack of
management and over exploitation. Further, interest
in establishing new commercial sandalwood
plantations is low due to the perceived long rotation
period and lack of policy initiatives by the
government to promote plantations. Timor-Leste
exported about 30 tons of sandalwood oil annually
during the 1960s, which reduced to 7 tons in 1994 due
to over exploitation of S. album in the past. It has been
reported that there are difficulties in establishing S.
album plantations, but the reasons for this have not
been clearly identified.

China
Although China has started establishing
plantations very recently, it has been made
significant progress over the past 5–6 years and about
60,000 seedlings are being planted annually. These
planting will greatly increase the supply of Indian
sandalwood to meet the growing domestic demand
to some extent in China.

S. austrocaledonicum, S. macgregorii (listed on the
IUCN Red as endangered), S. insulare, S. yasi, S.
ellipticum, S. freycinetianum, S. haleakalae and S.
paniculatum are commercial sandalwood species in
the Pacific region. Of these, S. yasi and S.
austrocaledonicum produce high-quality sandalwood
Australian sandalwood
Now, Australia is the largest producer and
exporter of S. album wood and oil in the world. Large
scale plantations have been raised in Northern
131
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
products like S. album from India and Indonesia. The
quality of Pacific island’s sandalwood oil generally
lies somewhere between Indian and Australian
sandalwood. While many sandalwood species in the
Pacific region are approaching commercial
extinction in their native habitats, both small and
larger scale sandalwood plantations are being
established in many parts of the Pacific region, which
will increasingly substitute the dwindling supplies
from wild sources.

Trade of sandalwood and its oil
Although Indian sandalwood is being
interwoven closely with the Indian culture and
traditions for more than 3000 years, its dominance on
the international sandalwood trade is waning during
the recent past due to various reasons. On the other
hand, other countries, especially Australia is
emerging as major player in sandalwood trade in the
world. However, still, there is a wide gap between
demand and supply for Indian sandalwood, which
offers great opportunities for the countries to
dominate the trade by upscaling sandalwood
cultivation using superior genotypes and
silviculture techniques.

African sandalwood
Osyris spp., especially O.lanceolata, belongs to same
familyas that of S. album i.e., Santalaceae. It is a multistemmed African tree that produces a heartwood oil
with similar fragrant properties to Santalum species.
African sandalwood is harvested from natural
populations of O. lanceolata in Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia,
Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania and much of the wood
is sold in the international market and subsequently
mixed with and sold as Indian sandalwood. The
average santalol content is typically much lower than
that of S. album. As result of exploitative harvesting of
this species, its wild reserves have declined in some
regions and approaching disappearance in some
areas. The adulteration of Indian sandalwood
products with imported African sandalwood has
partly eroded market confidence in sandalwood
products originating from India. African
sandalwood is, however, expected to remain part of
the global resource for the next 5-10 years.

Oil market
Among all sandalwoods, the east Indian
sandalwood has highest average oil content, and it is
used as bench mark to grade other sandalwood oils.
It is still retaining strong demand and reputation in
the international market due to its high santalol
content and price (Table 2). As decline of Indian
sandalwood supply in the market, Australian
sandalwood oil is accepted as an important product
in the fragrance market, and a large volume of it is
purchased by perfume manufacturers at a
discounted price, despite its low quality. It indicates
the very diverse nature of the international
sandalwood market from both a product
development and market segmentation perspective.

Table 2 Oil content in commercial sandalwood species
Sl No Species
Origin
1
2
3
4
India, Indonesia
Fiji
Vanuatu, New Caledonia
5
6
S. album
S. yasi
S. austrocaledonicum
S. macgregorii
(Brophy et al., 2009)
25
S. spicatum
S. lanceolatum
(AAG, 2006)
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Oil content (%)
Papua New Guinea
Western Australia
Queensland
(Barbour, 2020)
132
6-7
5
3–5
Price
(US$ per Kg)
74
45
38
0.5-2.5
2
1
10
05
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Carving logs
value of the S. yasi carving log is about 60% of S.
album (Table 3). While modest volumes of S.
macgregorii are traded internationally, most enters
through unofficial channels, and it is difficult to
track its price. Further, its price is on par with that of
S. austrocaledonicum since its oil quality relatively
good.

The carving or ornamental logs attract highest prices
in the market as they are quite rare and very little
supply due to overexploitation and harvesting of
immature trees. In this case too, the East Indian
sandalwood is fetching the highest price in the
market (US$74/kg) due to its premium quality. The
Table 3 Price for sandalwood products from different sandalwood species
Product
Carving log
Oil
Pre-grind
heartwood
S. album
74
1250
40-45
Price (US$/kg) in 2008-09
S. yasi S. austrocaledonicum S. spicatum
S. lanceolatum S. macgregorii
44
38
13
6
NA
1050
650
700
NA
30
29
Pre-grind heartwood
10
3
NA
– = not applicable; NA = not available
time, the price of its products also increases
simultaneously. Due to lack of transparency in the
production and marketing of Indian sandalwood, it
is difficult to predict the supply and price trend. The
problem in determining price trend is also
complicated by the extensive trade of illegal wood, as
this harvest is not reported. Despite the decline of
Indian sandalwood supply, still the demand is
relatively constant, and has pushed its price up
significantly over the past few years. Legally sourced
Indian sandalwood currently trades at between a $
30,000 and $ 85,000 per tonne, with sapwood prices
ranging from $ 1,000 to $ 2,500 per tonne.
Sandalwood sells for as little as $13 per kilogram in
various Asian black markets, but sells from more
than $130 a kilogram in mainland China. During the
period between 2001 and 2007, the price of Indian
sandalwood and its oil has been increased 17-fold.
The price growth for Indian sandalwood is
considered to be unsustainable at its current levels,
increases at rate of about 23% compounded rate over
15 years. The entry of high-quality synthetics into the
market may also reduce the potential for further
increase of sandalwood oil price. Over the past 10
years, the continuous price increase of Australian
sandalwood indicates an unsatisfied demand for the
commodity worldwide. Despite market potential
and demand for Australian sandalwood, it still does
not attract the premium price of Indian sandalwood.
Heartwood prices for Australian sandalwood range
between AU$3,000 and $16,500 per tonne. Due to
Pre-grind heartwood is used for oil extraction and
it is priced on a similar basis as that of carving logs
and oil, reflecting both the santalol levels and the
yield potentials of each species. The balance of the
remaining sandalwood logs goes to the agarbatti
industry and other products for burning. This part of
the industry is highly price sensitive (elastic
demand), and the high level of santalol powder get
higher price and accounts major share of the market.
The price range of agarbatti powder is US$18-1.2/kg.
The presence of substitutions in the agarbatti market
put pressure on price rise of pure sandalwood
products. On 15th March, 2021, the Karnataka Forest
Department (2021) has notified the revised price of 18
classes of sandalwood logs and current price of 1st
class sandalwood (Villayetbudh, Billet -I) is
increased from Rs.10,285 to Rs.12,200/kg (18.6%)
from 2019 to 2020 (Table 4). As there is huge
variations exist in both oil content and its quality
within species, it offers great opportunity to improve
the value of sandalwood resource through use of
high oil quality producing superior genotypes.
Gaps in supply and demand
Current world market demand for sandalwood
sourced from a variety of sandalwood species and
aggregate demand is thought to be around 5,000 6,000 tonnes per year. While widening the gap
between supply and demand of sandalwood over
133
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
overexploitation and lack of protection for the
sandalwood resource in many countries, both India
and Australia are the dominant sandalwood
suppliers in the global markets.

Table 4 Current price of Indian sandalwood logs in India
Sl Name of
No Sandalwood
class
A
Heartwood
1
Vilayetbudh (Billets- I)
2
Chinnabudh (Billets-II)
3
Panjam (Billets- III)
4
Gotla
5
Ghatabadla
6
Bagardad
7
Roots -I
8
Roots-II
9
10
Roots -III
Jajpokal -I
11
12
Jajpokal -II
Ainbagar
13
Cheriya/China Sali
or Large Chilta
Ain Chilta
Hatri Chilta
14
15
B
Mixed wood
16
Milvachilta
17
18
Basola buini
Saw dust
C
Sapwood
19
20
White chips
Bark and Waste
Description of class
Current
Rate/kg (Rs.)
(March 2021)
Sound billets weighing not less than 9kg and
not exceeding 112 pieces per tonne
slightly inferior billets weighing not less than
4.5 kg and not exceeding 224 pieces per tonne
Billets having small knots, cracks and hollows
weighing not less than 2.2 kg and not exceeding
448 pieces per tonne
Includes short and sound pieces. There are no
limits of weights and number of pieces per tonne
Billets with knots, cracks and small hollows
weighing not less than 4.5 kg and not exceeding
250 pieces per tonne
Consists of solid pieces without limit as regards
dimensions, weight or number
Pieces weighing not less than 6.75 kg and not
exceeding 150 pieces per tonne
Pieces weighing not less than 2.25kg and not
exceeding 448 pieces per tonne
Small and side roots below 2.25 kg in weight.
Hollow pieces weighing not less than 3.10 kg and
not exceeding 320 pieces per tonne
Hollow pieces weighing not less than 1.30 kg per tonne
Solid, cracked and hollow pieces weighing not
less than 450g
Consists of pieces and chips of heartwood
weighing not less than 2.25 g
Consists of pieces of heartwood
Consists of heartwood and chips obtained
from plaining billets with Hatri
Consists of heartwood and chips having fair
proportions of heartwood and sapwood
Consists of small heartwood and sapwood chips
Sawn powder obtained while sawing the sandalwood
Consist of chips of sapwood only
12200.00
10900.00
10000.00
7000.00
12700.00
10900.00
9700.00
8300.00
8500.00
13700.00
10600.00
8900.00
5500.00
5400.00
2850.00
3400.00
3600.00
810.00
105.00
25.00
(Source: KFD, 2021)
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
134
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Prospects of sandalwood market
regional market diversification with strong
economies, such as China, Europe, India, the
Middle East and North America. There are growing
middle classes with high disposable incomes in
China and India, nations with traditional cultural
associations with sandalwood, which will maintain
upward pressure on price even as supply increases or
if individual products or markets face a downturn.
Nevertheless, sandalwood is a luxury item, the price
of and demand for which would inevitably decline to
some extent in a major global economic downturn. It
is likely that a range of new uses will be developed
and traditional uses will be re-established when
more reliable and consistent supplies of high-quality
sandalwood oil are generated through sustainably
managed plantations. Due to presence of a
substantial unmet demand for high- and mid-range
perfumes, body-care products, aromatherapy,
traditional eastern medicines, new pharmaceutical
products, and top-of-the-range solid furniture and
associated increased demand in China, India and
other Asian economies will help underpin the price
of sandalwood oil for the foreseeable future.

At present, the sandalwood has become a boom
market. The price of one-kilogram Indian
sandalwood oil is about $3,000, or about five times as
much as silver in 2017. Price is rising by at least 20 to
25% a year. Although sandalwood products are
consumed globally, Asia is the largest consumer,
with China alone accounting for half of expected
global demand growth. The demand for sandalwood
is expected to increase fivefold (20,000 tonnes per
year) by 2025. Factors influencing demand in eastern
markets include increasing prosperity, a growing
market and consumer preference for natural
products, and significant growth in demand from
China. The major commercial end uses of
sandalwood in western markets are used as a key
component in fine fragrances, toiletries,
aromatherapy and incense, and as an insect
repellent. Factors influencing demand in Western
markets include growing consumer preference for
natural ingredients; manufacturer preference for
sustainable, ethically produced ingredients; and a
growing global beauty industry. It is reported that
future value of sandalwood plantation from
Australia range from 20,000 to 41,000 Australian
dollar per tonne for Indian sandalwood and 3,000 to
16,500 Australian dollar per tonne for Australian
sandalwood, S. spicatum.

On the other hand, the inferior oil quality species
such as S. spicatum, may struggle to maintain their
market share in the future, with lower grades of S.
album products. Synthetic santalols are expensive to
produce and in lesser demand in the perfume sector,
which may help the sandalwood to retain its market.
While sandalwood production from wild stands will
likely be at low levels (≤100 tonnes per annum−1) in
the future, the supply of plantation sandalwood from
the South Pacific Islands (Thomson, 2020), Australia
and India will gradually increase, as a result of
establishment of new sandalwood plantations by
smallholders, farmers and private companies.
Nevertheless, the biosynthesis of sandalwood oil and
other innovations may also affect sandalwood oil
production, such as the production of larger amounts
of higher-quality heartwood at a younger age
through improved genetics and silviculture,
including new heartwood stimulation technologies.

Although it is difficult to quantify the actual size of
the global market for sandalwood due to a lack of
availability of trade data and illegal trade (likely
around 33% of the total market), the most reasonable
estimate of the annual global sandalwood market in
recent times is 6320 Air Dry Tonnes Heartwood
(ADTH) during 2011–2012. Price of sandalwood rose
rapidly in the 2000 and the price of S. album
sandalwood in India increased at a compounded rate
of 15.1% between 1992 and 2014 and the wholesale
price for high-quality East Indian sandalwood oil
reached more than or equal to USD 3000 kg−1 (for
perfumes and new pharmaceutical uses in the United
States) in 2016.
The global sandalwood oil market is predicted to
double in value over the next five years, to USD 197
million by the end of 2026. The price elasticity for
sandalwood products can be counterbalanced and
buffered by both product diversification and
Future challenges in sandalwood supply
As result of declining of sandalwood supply in the
market, some firms like perfume companies would
prefer to go for synthetic ingredients over sandalwood
135
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
extracts. The supply, demand and price of substitute
products are also important factors in influencing
sandalwood market and its products in the future. The
low-cost synthetic sandalwood oil products used in
budget perfumes and cosmetics likely to limit future
price increases for natural products. Further, the
shortage of sandalwood has also resulted in
adulteration of sandalwood oil with poorer quality
blended oils. This has caused a negative impact on
buyer confidence and industry credibility. Therefore, a
standard certification system is needed to improve
buyer’s confidence and market credibility.

market will react when significant volumes of
product entered the market from Australian and
later Chinese plantations. Thus, increase in global
supplies of sandalwood will affect the pricing and
marketing of sandalwood in the market. Generally, it
is expected that an increased supply will place a
downward pressure on prices. For example, as the
Indonesian sandalwood oil, at rate of less than US $
10 of the East Indian sandalwood oil, entered into
international market in 1980s and captured nearly
40% of the global market by supplying 5 tonnes of oil
per month. As results of this, the export of
sandalwood oil from India was declined
significantly during that time. At present, the largest
threat to sandalwood is not smuggling or extinction
of wild reserves, but rather biotech companies taking
a lot of efforts to produce santalol rich sandalwood
oil by infusing DNA of sandalwood trees into yeast
cultures in days (in the lab) instead of years.

On the other hand, Australia is already a major
contributor to the international sandalwood market,
harvesting approximately 2,300 tonnes of Australian
sandalwood (S. spicatum). The declining production
of premium quality sandalwood in India, and the
eventual harvest of Indian and Australian
sandalwood from Australian plantations would
make Australia the largest global producer of
sandalwood in near future. It is expected that about
8,800 tonnes of Indian sandalwood heartwood
harvested from Australian plantations would reach
annually by 2021, while the harvest of Australian
sandalwood heartwood is expected to reach 3,195
tonnes per year. Despite the current strong demand
for sandalwood in world markets and supply
shortfalls, it is uncertain that how the international
Despite the challenges, the Indian sandalwood
producers have several advantages, owing to
premium quality of Indian sandalwood; there is a
great demand in international market. Moreover, the
Indian government is promoting sandalwood based
farming throughout the country through various
schemes and liberalization of restrictions on
sandalwood cultivation.

Conclusion
Area under commercial sandalwood plantations is increasing rapidly in all sandal growing countries. The
plantation grown sandalwood would replace or supplement the wild supply of sandalwood in near future.
Australia has become largest producer and supplier of sandalwood in the world. The oversupply and synthetic
substitutions of sandalwood oil may place downward pressure on price of sandalwood and oil. However, the
price elasticity of sandalwood products can be counterbalanced and buffered by both product diversification and
regional market diversification in the future. Further, it is expected that the East Indian sandalwood market
would remain strong for at least the next ten years due to its premium oil quality and expansion of sandalwood
area in India due to pro-sandalwood policy changes.

Further reading
Adviser Edge (2008). ITC sandalwood project 2008: Independent assessment. Advisor Edge Investment
Research: Melbourne.
Karnataka Forest Department. Revised Sandalwood rates, Aranyabhavan, Govt of Karnataka, Bangalore, 2021.
Pallavi, A., Return of scented wood, Down to Earth, Saturday 28 February 2015 https://www.downtoearth.org.in.
Thomson, L. A. J., Looking ahead – global sandalwood production and markets in 2040, and implications for
Pacific Island producers. Australian Forestry, 2020, 83:4, 245-254, DOI: 10.1080/00049158.2020.1841441.
www.360market updates.com
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
136
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Diversity Concerns on Scented wood
under Intensive Cultivation
Supriya K Salimath, Clara Manasa P A and
Ramakrishna Hegde*,
College of Forestry, Ponnampet, Kodagu.
Keladi Shivappa Nayaka University of Agricultural and
Horticultural Sciences, Shivamogga.
*Email:ramakrishnahegde@uahs.edu.in
O
wing to the huge benefits from cultivation
of sandalwood, it is gaining more and more
popularity among the farmers. The benefits
of Sandalwood cultivation are stupendous. After the
age of seven to eight years, the heartwood of a
sandalwood tree grows by 1 kg every year, and its
market price range between Rs 3,000 and Rs 6,000 per
kg. It is the only wood in the world to be sold by
weight. According to an estimation of Institute of
Wood Science and Technology (IWST), Bangalore,
the cost of sandalwood cultivation per hectare is
about Rs 30 lakh for the entire crop cycle, but the
returns vary from Rs 1.2 crore to Rs 1.5 crore. Institute
recommends a 15-year harvest cycle of sandalwood
for maximum benefit (Mishra et al., 2018).

The scientific and technological advancement in
the cultivation and protection of sandalwood made
the people invest in sandalwood cultivation in many
parts of India. A large number of private plantations
of sandalwood along with government plantations
started all over different states even in nonconventional areas (Fig.1) resulting in huge demand
for the sandalwood seedlings.

Fig.1 State wise sandalwood plantations in India (Source:Pallavi, 2015)
137
Vol 2. | Issue 1 | April-June 2021
All these plantations are being established by quality
planting materials through seed origin and
sandalwood is being cultivated with intensive
silvicultural practices on farmlands. However, a
large number of these plantations are raised from a
few seed sources due to the non-availability of
quality seed sources in time for their establishment.
Among these, seedlings from the Maryaoor Division
of Kerala have piqued the interest of farmers owing
to their high yield. Maryaoor now has the highest
number of sandalwood trees after the Spike disease
destroyed the best trees of Mysore and Tamil Nadu.
Superior sandalwood trees or plus trees have good
heartwood and high content of oil besides an almost
uniform girth. There is a huge demand for the seeds
and seedlings of Maryoor Division and most of the
plantations in South India have been established
using these seeds. This has to be taken into account
that Provenance variation in growth has been
maintained to conserve a species from its extinction.

the agent. One of the rationales for crop germplasm
conservation is that plant genes have utilitarian
value. When they are effectively used, they can
decrease crop susceptibility to natural predators,
pathogens, and stresses. Further, a single seed source
occupying a large area of plantations may pose a
higher risk of pest and disease in future (Anon, 1993).
Hence, there needs to be a scientific intervention to
avoid the future repercussions of the aforesaid
problem. The tragic disappearance of Hawaiian
sandalwood is particularly relevant to the discussion
of conservation of economically important tree
species, where there is often scant regulation, little
consumer awareness, complex environmental,
social, and economic pressures, and high demand
with finite supply (Susan, 2015). Diversifying the
seed sources of sandalwood plantations need to be
addressed urgently. Researchers should plan for the
best tree improvement program in such a way that to
identify the best trees from the best populations
which can benefit the farmers economically and
simultaneously, maintaining the broad genetic base
so that breeding for the diseases and pest resistance
can go on. The precautions are better than the cure.
Superior germplasm sources exhibiting disease
resistance, rapid growth, good bole form, early
heartwood formation and desirable heartwood oil
composition need to be developed for S. album in
India. The establishment of Progeny trials, seed
stands and clonal seed orchards can pave the way
towards safe and successful plantation development
of Sandalwood in India.

We have witnessed the mass destruction of
sandalwood plantations from spike disease before
and the lessons learned should not be forgotten. The
major factors influencing crop failure are regarded as
(a) Crop uniformity for the trait susceptible to an
environmental hazard and (b) extent of cultivation of
the crop (Monoculture). The greater the uniformity
for a susceptible trait and the more extensive the area
of cultivation, the greater the risk of disaster. In the
case of pest or pathogen attack, two additional
factors enhance the risks: (1) a highly dispersible
disease or insect agent, and (2) favourable
environmental conditions for the multiplication of
References:
Anonymous 1993., Managing global genetic resources National Academy Press, Washington., pp:47-84
https://www.nap.edu/read/2116/chapter/1
Arunkumar, A.N., Joshi, G., Rao, M.S., Rathore, T.S. and Ramakantha, V., 2016. The population decline of
Indian sandalwood and people’s role in conservation—an analysis. In Climate change challenge (3C) and
social-economic-ecological interface-building (pp. 377-387). Springer, Cham.
https://www.downtoearth.org.in/coverage/forests/return-of-scented-wood-48569
https://www.onmanorama.com/news/kerala/2021/06/16/marayoor-sandalwood-bounty-karnatakaaustralia.html
Mishra, B., Chakraborty, S., Sandhya, M.C. and Viswanath, S., 2018. Sandalwood farming in India: problems
and prospects. Indian Journal of Tropical Biodiversity, 26, pp.1-12.
Pallavi A., 2015., Return of scented wood., Down to earth
Susan, 2015., Big Island, Small Planet: Challenges and Failures in Conserving Hawaiian Sandalwood Trees.,
American botanical council:108
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
138
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Potential for growing Sandalwood (Santalum album)
tree in the salt affected soils
Introduction
M
odern agriculture
covers a range of
risks related to
production, prices and markets,
financial, institutional and social
aspects that often are directly or
indirectly associated with weather
impacts. The studies have shown
that by incorporating perennial
(tree) component in cropping
patterns the projected yield losses
under climate change scenarios can
be halved. Moreover, the farmers’
income from agriculture has
remained stagnated due to
increasing input cost in one hand
and decreasing productivity and
low price of output on the other
hand. In response so-called
‘profitable agriculture’ solutions
are intended to grow highly
profitable/valuable crops by the
farmers in their farmland to
address the issue of farm distress.
One example of such valuable
crops is sandalwood (Santalum
album Linn.), which is in great
demand in national and
international market and the dry
wood is sold at the high price with
rate ranging from Rs 800010000/kg. The annual production
of sandalwood in India has been
declining. Data show that
production declined from 4000 MT
(metric tonne) per year in the 1950s
to 500 MT in 2007. The global
annual demand for sandalwood is
estimated to be about 5000–6000
MT wood and100–120 Mg oil. The
major issues related to depletion of
the sandalwood in forests include
Raj Kumar*, Kamlesh Verma, Ashwani Kumar and A. K. Bhardwaj,
ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana.
*Email: rajcswcrti@gmail.com
the illegal felling, smuggling and diseases. The illegal felling and
smuggling of Sandalwood resulted from its high demand in the national
and international market. However, recent policy change by the govt.
has allowed farmers’ to cultivate and harvest sandalwood from their
farmland, and the species is making inroads into North India.

Scope of sandalwood
Indo-gangetic plain of India is characterized by the dominance of ricewheat cropping systems. In addition, Eucalyptus and Poplar based
agroforestry practices are also well accepted by farmers in their
farmland. However, only major issue faced by farmers is the moderate
return from these farming systems, and the problem is further
exaggerated in the salt affected soils. In India, the estimated salt affected
area is currently 6.67 Mha, but the future projections point to an increase
to 16 Mha by 2030, due to climatic influences and anthropogenic
mismanagement, which could adversely affect the crop productivity
and farm income. In order to protect farmers from productivity/
price/return related distress, a permanent and long term solution is
urgently required. One of the alternatives is to grow low input-high
output crops such as Sandalwood to increase farmers’ income and
reduce salinity induced losses. Due to the widening gap between
demand and supply, Sandalwood has a great potential as plantation or
as a component in agro-forestry systems. However, large scale planting
of sandalwood has not picked up due to lack of awareness among
farmers, non-availability of quality planting material, rigid government
policies, lack of knowledge on poor establishment resulting from its root
parasitic nature and lack of understanding about host–parasite
relationships, absence of regional specific plantation technology, and
the lack of knowledge on its performance on alluvial soil in general and
on salt affected soil in particular. One specific biological property of the
sandalwood is the pattern of life that semi parasitic character of the root
(Fig 1.). Hence, there is a potential to increase sandalwood production
through better understanding of the nature of host–parasite
relationship, production of quality planting materials and knowledge of
its silviculture. Presently, only a few studies are available on the relation
of host plant with sandalwood tree and that too only in Southern Indian
states. Moreover, the existing identified salt tolerant trees are less
profitable, so identifying highly profitable trees such as Sandalwood for
the salt environment is urgently required.

139
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Salinity tolerance of sandalwood
Sandalwood is semi-root parasite, which requires
host plant to supply nutrient and water because it
absorbs less material from the natural environment.
Further, Sandalwood growth is significantly affected
in the absence of host plant, while more than one type
of host is considered better with preferably the
legumes. Beside this number of host plants, spacing
between plants and soil type also affects Sandalwood
growth. As far as abiotic stress tolerance is concerned,
S. album is tolerant to moderate (4-8 dS m-1) salinity,
alkalinity (pH 9.0), and drought conditions.
Sandalwood contains some novel protein-coding
genes that impart tolerance to species against various
abiotic stresses, such as drought and salinity.
However, scarce information is available on the
growth and productivity potential of S. album under
the abiotic stress conditions. Little is known about the
mechanisms by which S. album adapts to different
stresses, specifically the drought and salinity. Being
hemi-parasitic nature, identification of host plant for
sandalwood could be the first step toward increasing
abiotic stress tolerance of S. album. A very less
information is available on probable effect of salinity
stress on the growth and physiology, which will affect
its promotion and adoption in the dry lands.

Figure 1. Haustoria formation
between the Sandalwood and host root
Figure 2. Effect of salinity and two host species (Azadirachta
indica and Melia dubia) on the growth of Sandalwood.

The results of present investigation showed that
under controlled conditions, the maximum (p<0.05)
height (79.0 cm) and collar diameter (5.4 mm) growth
of sandalwood were observed with Melia dubia and
Dalbergia sissoo, respectively. Under saline conditions
(ECiw 9), the maximum (p<0.05) height (65.0 cm) and
collar diameter (4.7 mm) growth of sandalwood were
recorded with Dalbergia sissoo and Azadirachta indica,
respectively (Table 1; Fig 1). Similar trends were
observed for the other growth parameters, such as
number of leaves and branches and total plant biomass
in Sandalwood. Salinity stress increased the Na+/ K+
ratio in Sandalwood leaves, and its higher value (3.4)
was observed with Citrus aurantium, while lower value
(0.91) was recorded with Dalbergia sissoo (Fig 3). The
physiological processes such as photosynthetic rate,
relative water content and chlorophyll content
decreased by 29, 35 and 67 %, respectively, under
salinity stress. Similarly, among 10 host species,
Sandalwood grown with Melia dubia, Dalbergia sissoo
and Azadirachta indica showed highest antioxidant
enzymatic activities (Apx, CAT, Pox, GR and SOD)
under saline condition. The number of haustoria on an
average reduced by more than 50 per cent under saline
conditions, compared to control.

Growth potential of sandalwood in saline
soils
An experiment was carried out at ICAR-CSSRI for
six months during 2020-21, to observe the effects of
saline irrigation (ECiw 9), including control and ten
host plant species (Acacia ampliceps, Azadirachta
indica, Citrus aurantium, Casuarina equisetifolia,
Dalbergia sissoo, Leucaena leucocephala, Melia dubia,
Phyllanthus emblica, Punica granatum, Syzygium
cumini) on the growth potential and physiology of
sandalwood. The different salinity levels were
considered to determine the threshold level of
salinity tolerance in sandalwood. The different host
species was considered as sandalwood’s ability to
form haustorial connections (Fig. 1) varies with the
type of host species-which ultimately influence the
survival, growth and productivity of sandalwood.
Therefore, our aim was to assess the growth potential
and salinity tolerance of sandalwood in association
with different host plant species.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
140
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Table 1. Effect of salinity and different host species on height and diameter growth of Sandalwood
Host species
Melia dubia
Casuarina equisetifolia
Citrus aurantium
Phyllanthus emblica
Syzygium cumini
Acacia ampliceps
Punica granatum
Azadirachta indica
Leucaena leucocephala
Dalbergia sissoo
Mean
Height (in cm)
Control
76.4
64.1
67.2
70.8
67.4
57.5
69.6
68.2
75.2
79.0
67.4
EC 9
60.2
42.0
53.3
59.2
60.1
54.7
50.4
65.0
62.7
65.8
60.1
Collar diameter (in mm)
Control
EC 9
5.82
4.25
3.80
3.51
4.84
3.60
5.71
4.21
4.04
3.69
4.79
3.96
4.84
3.60
5.10
4.60
4.35
4.00
5.45
4.80
4.82
4.00
Figure 3. Effect of salinity and host species on Na+/K+ ratio in sandalwood leaves
The results indicated that imposed salinity levels had only slight to moderate effect on the sandalwood growth;
however, its growth pattern was mainly governed by the type of host species. The performance of host plant is the
single most important criteria for satisfactory growth performance of sandalwood under saline conditions. The
results showed that salinity stress resulted in a decrease in number of root-induced haustoria, while increase in
leaf Na+/K+ ratio and antioxidant enzymes activities, indicates existence of a salinity tolerance mechanism in the
Sandalwood. The sandalwood produced maximum haustorial connections with Melia dubia under controlled and
with Dalbergia sissoo under salinity stress conditions, suggesting the species specific preference of sandalwood for
haustorial formations under the contrasting environmental conditions.

Conclusions
Our findings showed that sandalwood growth varied with the host species both under control and saline
conditions, and it exhibited a good growth potential under the saline soils conditions. Therefore, based on results
obtained so far, sandalwood has shown good prospects of successful cultivation with suitable compatible host
species such as Melia dubia, Dalbergia sissoo and Azadirachta indica in the saline soil environment.

141
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Practical Experiences in
Sandalwood Cultivation
Nitin Patel,
Chandan Vikas Association, 102-Avinash Apartment,
B/H Davdeep Complex, Nizampura, Vadodara, Gujarat.

D
emand for Indian sandalwood is high in
the world. Our sandalwood is very
different from many other countries in
the world, which cannot be compared, in terms of
fragrance, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and other such
properties.
In this article, I write about the practical experience
on cultivation of sandalwood., so that other farmers
will come to know about it. Today, when thousands
of farmers in India cultivate sandalwood, farmers
need to be aware of the questions that come up
regarding problems and benefits of sandalwood
cultivation.

Farmers often incur loss from improper
application of fertilizer, water and late
treatment of the disease.

(3)
The biggest problem is the theft of sandalwood
from farmer’s field.

(4)
The biggest question is the sale of sandalwood
and its adequate price.

Less investment, less effort, and more income.

(6)
Other crop cultivation can be done with
sandalwood.

Loss from misdirection / misguidance
Main Problems
(2)
(5)
Since the state governments have relaxed the law on
sandalwood cultivation since 2002, farmers have
gradually started cultivating sandalwood.
Sandalwood cultivation was a new topic for farmers.
Since Institute of Wood Science and Technology
(IWST) started imparting training on sandalwood
since 2005, its awareness has been spreading among
the farmers of India. I have also taken training in 2014.

Problems and Benefits of sandalwood
cultivationLack of adequate sandalwood cultivation
literature that would give proper guidance for
the farmers.

Growing agro forestry helps climate change
mitigation.

Changes in sandalwood cultivation, Govt. Law and
training
I am not writing this article in any scientific
language but I am trying to write in a simple
language for all to understand.

(1)
(4)
Tulsibhai from Mehsana, Gujarat, planted
sandalwood in 45 acres in 2007. Tulsibhai planted
sandalwood at a distance of 10 x 10 feet. Today, the
plantation 14 years old. Tulsibhai had planted lemon
as the host tree, all the lemons died in 2011 due to
sandalwood. He then started planting Casuarina as
host plants but the sandalwood killed the casuarina
trees. At the end they planted saptaparna trees. So,
the sandalwood growth that should take place in 14
years is relatively low.

Advantage / Benefit.
(1)
Sandalwood cultivation yields more income
than it is earned by the farmer from routine
cultivation.

(2)
Routine farming results in loss of profits from
the natural environment, while long-term
cultivation of sandalwood does not have any
significant side effects.

(3)
Sandalwood cultivation costs (labour, fertilizer,
security, etc.) only 5% to 7% of the income.

Died Lemontrees in Tulsibhai farm
143
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood cultivation in India
Farmers have been misguided and misled by the
state governments for changing the law for
cultivating sandalwood and not providing
information about it. Nursery owners guide farmers
to plant sandalwood plants at 6 x 6, 8 x 8, or 10 x 10
feet in the lure of selling more seedlings and making
profit. Farmers are happy with high density
plantation for 4, 5 years, but in my experience, after 6,
7 years, the growth of their sandalwood stops. Its
girth is not more. I have seen many farms with these
problems are in many states like Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Gujarat etc..

India has planted 1,35,00,000 sandalwood trees
from 2015 to 2021 (This figure is based on the
information provided verbally by the nursery
owners who came in contact with us). But there are
many nurseries in India which are not in touch with
us who have sold sandalwood plants and we do not
have statistics on the number of sandalwood plants
sold by the state governments. But an estimate of 2.5
crore sandalwood plants has been planted so far, that
is 30 lakh sandalwood trees have been planted every
year till 2021. So, in terms of income, after 2033,
Indian farmers are likely to earn Rs 15,000 –
Rs.20,000 crore every year.
The Chandan Vikas Association (CVA) has
provided guidance to 7186 farmers through
various seminars and webinars. Apart from this
many farmers in India may have taken training
from IWST. Many farmers might have taken
guidance from any other sources whose records
we do not have. Thus, thousands of farmers
have moved towards sandalwood cultivation.

Production of sandalwood heartwood
Production of sandalwood heartwood will
start 300 tons to 400 tons per year from 2027. At
least 6,000 to 10,000 tons of heartwood will be
produced every year after 2033. The Government of
India will open export permission for sandalwood in
future. Farmers must come together and start a
production unit. Unity has to work. Farmers will
have to face a lot of trouble in selling sandalwood if
they do not go beyond unity.

Sandalwood plantation in Dharmesh bhai farm
The photo above was taken at Dharmeshbhai's
farm on 7.4.2016, which is near Dharmaj village in
Gujarat, which was planted in 2007. There were 230
sandalwood trees. All are harvested and sold for only
Rs 3 lakh in 2021. This sandalwood began to grow
into heartwood trees. Who is responsible for the girth
of sandalwood and heartwood after 14 years....?.
Planting distance not proper, no host, water and
manure management. There are many such farms in
India even today.

To sell sandalwood, first test every tree after 15
years, analyse it, get the cutting permission of the tree
to be cut, keep the tree in your house for 4 months,
separate its heartwood and then sell it. All this
process will take 6 to 12 months.

When a farmer cultivates sandalwood, he wish to
become a millionaire. In his thoughts, he works hard
in the early years to meet his expectations. When the
growth of his farm stops / stuck after 5- 6 years then
his enthusiasm breaks down, he stops working hard,
he spends days and years in despair. Sandalwood
cultivation is not bad, but the wrong way of guidance
put them in distress.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
(1) Mr. Hiralal who is a farmer from At- Javkheda
village in Nandurbar, Maharashtra, had planted
sandalwood trees on the border of the farm. 11 trees
of age 11 to 20 years were cut down with the
permission from Forest Department. The heartwood
weight of this sandalwood tree was 135 kg, whose
record is not written scientifically. In 2021, all these
144
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
types of sandalwood were sold for Rs. 8 lakhs by
CVA.
(2) Mr. Gamanbhai Vaishya is a farmer of Dahod
district/ Tal-Sanjeli village of Gujarat. He planted
sandalwood all along the border of his farm. He cut
sandalwood trees at the age of 15 to 20 years with
forest department permission. It weighed 365 kg of
sandalwood heartwood, which sold for Rs 17 lakh.
(3) Mr. B. B. Limbachia, from Mota Garadiya
village in Jamnagar district of Gujarat is an ex Forest
Officer. He had 9 trees in his farm of about 15-30
years old. Heartwood was separated 4 months after
cutting. This heartwood weight was 325 kg. Out of
which 100 kg wass sold for Rs. 7 lakhs.
cultivation and trade. So, the Central Government
and the State Government must make farmer
oriented laws to promote sandalwood cultivation. If
the government does not amend the law, the farmers
will change the law through the Supreme Court, as is
in the public interest. There was a time 15 years ago,
when farmers had 1% sandalwood and state
governments had 99%. Now, State governments will
have 10% and farmers have 90%. So, it is right time
for the laws of the state governments to be made in
the interest of the farmer.

Problems in sale
Selling sandalwood is not easy and often farmers
are deceived by middlemen. Farmers do not find the
original buyer, if found they show many kinds of
defects, such as, this sandalwood does not have the
right aroma, is not thick, does not have oil, is not very
old, the colour is not right. The trader tries to buy for
less money by showing many such defects. If the
farmers want full income, price of sandalwood, then
in future the farmers together will have to set up a
production unit. Without this, you will not get the
original income or price of sandalwood in any way.

Vigilance for theft
Manufacturing companies buy stolen wood at Rs
2,000 per kg. The stolen wood are tricked into selling
officially, where Forest and GST department does
not get to know. This practice runs on a very large
scale. At present, the companies trading in
sandalwood have come together and decided that we
should not buy sandalwood at a higher price than a
certain amount.

Do not let anyone enter your sandalwood farm
after 8-10 years. Allowing anyone to come in means it
is most likely to be stolen. When it comes to selling
sandalwood, do not take anyone to the farm to show
the sandalwood to a trader. Real sandalwood buyers
are 1- 2%, the rest are traders sent by commission
agents or thieves to study. This is the biggest
problem. Before showing sandalwood to someone,
ask for their Aadhaar card, sandalwood license,
factory address, after seeing all this, show
sandalwood only after checking.

After the sale of heartwood of sandalwood, TP
Questions for the pass
Obtaining Transit Permit (TP) for the
transportation of sandalwood from the State Forest
Departments is a big challenge for the farmers.
Different States have different laws to regulate
sandalwood cultivation and trade. Often such
regulations cause impediment for sandalwood
If you would like any guidance in this regard, you
can contact CVA. Trusting someone in sandalwood
would be the biggest mistake of life. The whole life's
work will go a waste and I hope it will be useful for
the farmers interest in Sandalwood cultivation.

145
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood: History, Uses, Present
and the Future
Ramakant Harlalka,
Nishant Aroma Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai.

H
arshavardhana was considered as one of
the most prominent Indian emperors
who ruled India during 7th century AD.
Kannauj was his capital which is located on Ganges.
He built a huge empire that extended from north &
north-western India till the Narmada in the South.
During Kumbh festival at Haridwar, he was
traveling with several boats from Kannauj with full
load of various articles for donation and while
coming back he used to bring sandalwood logs in all
the boats. All sandalwood logs were converted into
paste after grinding on stone and which was distilled
in Cupper-deg distillation unit to recover
sandalwood oil.

Detergents, Pharmaceutical, Cosmetic and Allied
Industries. On a spiritual level, sandalwood supports
the experience of inner unity of mind, body, and
spirit; awareness of inner soul life, enhancement of
higher consciousness and related creativity,
relaxation of the conscious mind, meditation, prayer
and spiritual practice, peace, and acceptance.
Sandalwood has distinct, high-value end uses that
function to underpin its price and maintain demand
in different market segments and regions. These uses
and markets include essential oil from its heartwood
as an ingredient (providing woody base notes and
fixative properties) in fine perfumes, exclusive
natural body-care products and pharmaceuticals,
especially for European and North American
markets. It is being used extensively for carvings,
traditional medicines and religious uses in China, the
Republic of Korea and Japan. The sandalwood based
attars are used funeral pyres and chewing tobaccos in
India.

Sandalwood is very popular in the Islamic world,
where it is used as perfume or burned as "bukhoor" to
fumigate rooms and spaces of worship. Sandalwood
has been used in several religious practices for
centuries in the form of carvings and applied to the
body for purification purposes. When Buddha
passed away in 543BC, it is said that his body was
cremated on a bed of sandalwood, enhancing the
well-known belief that sandalwood elevates the
user’s spirituality. In recent times yoga and
meditation have introduced incense culture to the
Western world, where sandalwood together with
other natural herbs, is burnt as incense to elevate and
encourage holistic healing.

Present status
Since liberalization of rules regarding cultivation
of sandalwood during 2001 and 2002, there has been
tremendous interest among farmers and
stakeholders across India in farming this tree. High
demand and remunerative prices of heartwood have
motivated farmers/stakeholders to take up
sandalwood farming especially in non-traditional
areas in many states across India like Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and
Maharashtra since the past decade. The potential of
the tree in natural and naturalized forested areas,
existing farming systems and other silvihorticultural systems across India have been studied
by IWST including heartwood and oil formation
using non-destructive methods. The scope of
cultivation in current farming systems including
economics of cultivation have been critically
analyzed and presented. The current problems and
Use of sandalwood
Sandalwood has many medicinal uses and hence,
it is used in large scale in the manufacture of
ayurvedic medicines. Its products have the finest of
fragrance, one that lasts for years. Its products are
used widely from birth to incineration in various
rituals and it is also used in temples as prasadam. The
sandalwood oil is used for varied applications
because of its unique chemical and physical
properties. Further, it has gained a special place in
Aroma Therapy, Perfumery, Agarbattis, Soaps and
147
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
future prospects for increased livelihood
opportunities and enhancing farm income levels also
discussed along with suggestion for promoting
sandalwood farming practices across India.

(partly to fully air-dried, ‘village gate’ price) for
carving, furniture, and oil distillation has increased
steadily to USD 50 kg−1 in 2019 while the price for
grade-1 S. austrocaledonicum heartwood (partly to
fully air-dried; ‘on the beach’ price) is USD 35 kg−1.
The global market for sandalwood products,
sustainably sourced from a growing plantation
resource in Australia, Asia and the Pacific Islands, is
predicted to remain strong up to and beyond 2040.

Future prospects
The markets for sandalwood heartwood and oils
from Pacific Island countries have been strong and
have continually diversified since exports to China
commenced over 200 years ago. The global
sandalwood market remains buoyant, with 2019
wholesale prices of Santalum album oil ranging from
USD 1750 kg−1 (unlicensed production through
Dubai) to USD 2100 kg−1 for licensed production
from India and USD 2000–2500 kg−1 as wholesale
price for Australian S. album plantation oil. The
wholesale price for S. austrocaledonicum oil is USD
1500–1750 kg−1. The heartwood (air-dried) of S.
album is mostly traded by growers for more than
USD 100 kg−1. The price for Fiji’s S. yasi heartwood
The high rate of increase in sandalwood prices in
recent decades is unlikely to continue, due to both an
expanding supply from increasingly better-managed
plantations and genetic improvement followed by
technological innovations to induce earlier and
greater heartwood yields in planted sandalwood.
Nevertheless, sandalwood prices will remain
sufficiently high to make agroforestry cultivation a
commercially attractive proposition for efficient
Pacific Island sandalwood growers.

One year Diploma in Advanced Woodworking
Course Description:
The Diploma Course was launched in the year 2018-19 jointly with M/s. Biesse Manufacturing Company Private Limited. This program offers an excellent
opportunity for trainees to acquire required skill set to work on wood and wood products. This course structured to provide first hand experience in
handling state of the art machineries to make them employable in wood based industries. This course has eight major modules namely, Fundamentals of
wood materials, Fundamentals of Engineering, Wood processing using advanced machines & allied processes, Loading & unloading systems, machinery
safety, maintenance of machines, Assembly & Joinery, Advanced application of software (CNC, CAD/CAM & 3D-Pytha) and project work. Upon
successful completion of training, the trainees will be able to handle most of the advanced woodworking machines that are used in the wood based
industries.

Eligibility
Course Fee
Extra
Security Deposit
Intake
: Pass in Pre-University Course/Senior Secondary/ XII/ Equivalent from
recognized Board. (Graduates in Science / Forestry / Engineering are
encouraged to apply).
: Rs. 50,000/- for the entire course
: Rs.1,650/- per month towards Accommodation Charges Food Charges
(as per actual)
: Rs. 5,000/- (Refundable)
: Maximum 30 Candidates
INSTITUTE OF WOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education)
An Autonomous Body of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of India
P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru – 560 003, India Website: http://iwst.icfre.gov.in/awwtc/awwtc.htm
Ph: 080-22190148, 150 Fax: 080-23340529 E-Mail: awtc_iwst@icfre.org,dir_iwst@icfre.org
148
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Indian Sandalwood – A Treasure House
Introduction
S
andalwood is considered as
the oldest, precious and
commercially significant
herbal plant which is also used as
timber in India. It is well known for
its unique and distinctive
fragrance. The heartwood of the
plant is very expensive and is
associated with great commercial
value in the national and
international markets as it is
enriched with fragrant essential oil.
The aromatic essential oil of the
plant is used in various perfumes,
food products, cosmetics, aroma
therapy and pharmaceutical
industries. Traditionally, the plant
is used in various medicinal
systems such as Ayurveda, Unani
and Siddha to cure diseases like
jaundice, dysentery, gastric
irritability and as a tonic for liver,
heart, fever, memory
improvement, anti-poison and also
as blood purifier. It is considered
sacred and its importance and
usage are also mentioned in Vedas,
Puranas, Buddhism, epics and
scriptures. In Ayurveda, the
sandalwood plant is used as an
expectorant, diuretic, astringent,
stimulant, coolant and sedative
agent. Besides this, the plant is
associated with therapeutic and
pharmacological properties such as
antioxidant, anti-cancerous, antiinflammatory, antiviral,
antibacterial, antifungal, hepatoprotective and cardio-protective.
Currently most of the world
demand of sandalwood is supplied
from Australia using S.spicatum
known as Australian sandalwood.
Due to the high value and the
R. V. S. K. Reddy, J. Omprasad and. T. Janakiram,
Dr. Y. S. R. Horticultural University, Venkataramannagudem,
Andhra Pradesh .

demand, there is a growing attention at present in establishing
sandalwood, especially S. album plantations in the tropical regions.
There is a trend in sandalwood plantation establishment in Australia,
India, Sri Lanka, China, and Fiji recently due to the large domestic
demand and the existing high demand (Subasinghe, 2013). However,
the plantation sector lacks the information on establishing sandalwood
plantations, which is identified as a great risk when considering their
profit maximising goal. Without the information such as nursery
techniques, host suitability, plantation establishment, growth rates and
oil characteristics, managers of sandalwood plantations might therefore
face difficulties in achieving the expected outcomes.

Global sandalwood market
It is difficult to quantify the size of the global market for sandalwood
due to a lack of published and available trade data and also the scale of
illegal trade (likely around 33% of the total market). The most reasonable
estimate of the annual global sandalwood market in recent times is 6320
tonnes in 2011-2012 (Coakley 2013). It is clear, however, that global
demand for sandalwood remains strong and also that demand has
considerably outstripped supply, especially for East Indian
sandalwood, in the past two or three decades. Consequently, prices
raised rapidly. The price of S. album sandalwood in India increased at a
compounded rate of 15.1% between 1992 and 2014 (Anon 2014), and the
wholesale price for high-quality East Indian sandalwood oil reached
≥USD 3000 kg−1 (for perfumes and new pharmaceutical uses in the
United States) in 2016 and early-to-mid 2017 before dropping back to
around USD 2000-2500 kg−1. The global sandalwood oil market in 2020 is
estimated at USD 97 million (approx. 50 tonnes) (Global Sandalwood Oil
Markets Report 2020).

India
The annual official harvest of sandalwood was 300-370 tonnes in 20082012 (Padmanabha 2013) but the total production in 2011-2012 was
estimated at 1250 tonnes, with 1000 tonnes associated with illegal
harvesting. There has been considerable private-sector interest in
developing sandalwood plantations, including northern locations, such as
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan,
where the species does not naturally occur and which are free from
sandalwood spike disease (mycoplasma). The area currently planted with
sandalwood in India is estimated to have grown dramatically in the last
five years to an estimated 30,000 ha in 2019, in both agroforestry
configurations and plantations. It is considered that about 1000 ha of 25-30year-old sandalwood plantations will be harvested per year in 2040,
149
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
producing 8000 tonnes with an oil content of 2.5% oil,
or 200 tonnes of oil. It is estimated that wild stands will
produce 2000 tonnes with 5% oil, or 100 tonnes of oil.

gamma-curcumenes and bergamotenes
phenylpropanoids. The major essential oil
components of the plant include sesquiterpene
alcohols like epi-cis-beta-santalol, alpha-transbergamotol, cis-beta santalol and cis-alpha santalol.
The minor constituents are comprising of
heterocyclics, alpha-isabolol, hydrocarbons antene,
alpha-santalene, beta-santalene, epi-beta-santalene,
alpha-ergamotene, alpha curcumene, betacurcumene, gamma-curcumene, beta-bisabolene,
alpha-isabolol, transbeta-santalol and cis-lanceo. The
other chemical constituents in sandalwood plant oil
include teresantalol, santenol, alcohol, aldehydes,
alpha santalic acid, beta-santalic acid, ketones, nortricyclic santalal, isovaleraldehyde, antenone,
santalone and other acids including teresantalic
acids. (Shailja and Gitika 2021).

Demand in 2040
The local demand for sandalwood oil is estimated
at a minimum of 250 tonnes in 2040. It is likely that
local S. album plantation wood will mainly be used
domestically for agarabatti, funeral pyres and oil,
especially for soaps/attars. India will likely be a net
importer of sandalwood heartwood and/or oil in
2040, but it is difficult to predict the quantity due to
uncertainties in production, quality and maturation
times of its recent plantations. These new plantations
are mainly in non-traditional sandalwood-growing
areas, and the impacts of sandalwood
spike and other pests and diseases are
unknown and growth rates/
90 percent of
heartwood development rates
sandalwood trees
uncertain. Very much need to entertain
sandalwood plantations in natural
are distributed in
habitats and forests and rules and
2
Karnataka
(5245
km
),
regulations should be made
convenient.
Tamil Nadu (3045 km2)
Seed and seed treatment
Seed production generally is
good in one of the seasons.
Certain trees flower only once a
year and some do not flower
regularly. About 6000 seeds make
1 kg. Seeds can be collected
directly from the tree. The fruits
Phytochemical constituents of
and the rest in Andhra should
be de-pulped, washed
sandalwood
Pradesh (175 km2)
thoroughly in water, dried under
Plant is a rich source of volatile oil
shade, and stored in airtight
isolated from the roots and heartwood
containers. Soak the seeds in 0.05%
of the plant. These volatile oils are
gibberellic acid overnight facilitates good
extracted from the roots and heartwood after 30
germination.
years of its growth. The oil is yellowish, colourless,
viscous, with a heavy sweet odour. The main active
Primary nursery
constituent present in the volatile oil is santalol
which is a mixture of two primary sesquiterpene
Seeds germinate best when they are sown in a freealcohol, beta-santalol (16.0%) and alpha-santalol
draining medium such as 2:1 mix of river sand and
(19.6%) where alpha form predominates. The minor
soil. Composted sawdust is also a very good
constituent of the plant includes lanceol, bisabolol,
germination medium. Nick the seed shell to expose
nuciferol and sesquiterpene hydrocarbons like alpha
the kernel. Nicked seed begins to germinate after 2
and beta santalenes, beta-bisabolene, alpha, beta and
Compounds present in plant parts
Leaves
Seed
Seed cover
Bark
Wood oil
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
Urosilic acid,catechin, vilexin, iso vilein, shilcimic acid, gama aminobutyric acid
Xymnemeic acid, oleic acid,linoleic acid, stearic acid
Betulinic acid
Tri terpenoid (3-betayl-palmitate)
α-santalol, β-santalol, bergamotol
150
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Raising wildlings and management
weeks, whereas seeds that are not nicked may take 6
weeks to germinate. Sow the seeds in a seedling tray
or pot, just (5-10 mm) below the surface of the
medium so that the seeds do not touch each other.
Water to keep the medium moist but not wet. During
the wet season, trays may need to be brought out of
the rain. Protect germinating seedlings from full sun
and predation by rats and birds
Seedlings germinated naturally under an
existing sandalwood tree can be collected and
transplanted in the nursery or another location
(such seedlings are called wildlings). This is a simple
method of establishing new stands of sandalwood.
Select sandalwood trees that are fruiting or are
otherwise known to fruit heavily. Clean all
undergrowth from beneath the canopy of the
selected sandalwood trees.Loosen the soil in the
cleared area by shallow digging or cultivating only
the top 5 cm of soil. Wildlings begin to germinate in
the cultivated area about 1-2 months after the soil is
disturbed. Water the cultivated area during dry
periods, if possible, or after the first seedlings break
through the soil. Keep the cultivated area free from
weeds.

Secondary nursery
Seedlings are ready to be transplanted in poly bags
once they develop two leaves. Use a sterilised
growing medium in the poly bags that has 50% sand
to assist drainage and 50% soil to improve waterholding capacity. Prick out the seedlings (when they
are at the 2-leaf stage) by lifting the root system with a
cleaned stick and pulling gently on the base of the
stem. Plant the seedling firmly in the medium and
cover the roots. Place the poly bags on raised
benches, particularly during the rainy season, to help
drainage.Cover to protect the seedlings during
periods of heavy rain to reduce the chance of the
growing medium becoming saturated. Grow the
seedlings under shade (e.g. shady tree or shade
cloth). The pot host Alternanthera should be planted
as stem cuttings after the sandalwood is at 4-6 leaf
stage. If the pot host is planted too early, it will grow
quickly to overtake the young seedling, leading to
stunted growth and death of the sandalwood. If the
pot host is planted too late, the sandalwood may
grow slowly. Seedlings can survive without a host
for 3 years but thereafter they tend to die. In a natural
population 2 percent of seedlings do not produce
haustoria and they fail to survive on their own
beyond 3 years of age.

When wildlings have reached 4 to 6 leaf stage they
are transplanted to polybags along with a seed of
Cajanus cajan, Alternanthera sessilis (L.), Cassia fistula L.,
Mimosa pudica L., etc., the primary host for better
growth of sandalwood seed. Polybags should contain
soil mixture of ratio 2:1:1 (Sand: Red earth: Fym).
Sterilizing the growing medium can help to prevent
diseases. The medium can be sterilized by covering
black plastic sheet and leaving it in the sun for a day or
heating it over a fire in a steel drum. It has been found
that polybags of 30 x 14 cm size are the best. Seedlings
are carefully removed from beds with all roots intact;
roots should not be allowed to dry. Shade can be
provided for a week immediately after
transplantation. Watering is to be done once a day, but
excess moisture is to be avoided. The watering regime
for seedlings raised in a nursery will vary according to
the amount of rainfall and the position of the seedling
in the nursery (e.g. 50% shade versus full sun).
Seedlings in full sun during the dry season may need
to be watered every day, but during the wet season
shelter from the rain may be necessary. Host plants are
to be pruned frequently, so that they do not over grow
sandalwood and hamper its growth. Shifting may be
done once in two months to avoid root penetrating soil
and grading is to be done once in three months.
Weeding is to be done at regular intervals. Seedlings of
about 30 cm height can be raised in 6-8 months’ time. A
well branched seedling with a brown stem is ideal for
planting in the field.

Hardening seedlings
Once the seedlings reach the 10-12-leaf stage, they
need to be progressively moved to areas of higher
light levels to ‘harden’ or acclimatize them to
conditions in the field. They should have 50% shade
in the first month, and then 25% shade for another
month, and then one to several months in full sun,
before they are planted in the field. Seedlings
transplanted directly from the shade to a full-sun
position in the field typically have poor survival.

151
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Table: Influence of shading type on the
growth of 8-months old young plantation
Problems in nursery
Treatment
i Low quality of seed
Quality of seed depends on condition of
mother trees. The ideal mother tree should be
more than 20 years old, healthy and having
high santalol.

Control
Shade with
Imperata cylindrica
Shade with maize
and kacangturis
Shade with Acacia villosa
Shade with
kacangturis
ii Competition for nutrients
Sandalwood is hemi parasite plant, meaning
that the plant should have a host which
provides some nutrients to the sandalwood
plant. Nutrition competition arises between
sandalwood and the host plant.

0.58
71.87
56.63
56.43
0.59
0.59
71.99
57.81
70.32
0.71
84.38
(Source: Butar 2007)
Sandalwood spacing
The distance between sandalwood and host trees
is critical to ensure good growth over the entire
rotation of the plantation. The minimum spacing of
sandalwood trees is 3 m × 6 m or 5 m × 5 m, with
large, long-term host trees planted at least every fifth
tree within each row. At a spacing of 3 m for
sandalwood, the host trees would be spaced every 15
m. It is recommended that each row is ‘offset’ so that
every sandalwood is within 5-6 m of a long-term
host. The number of intermediate host trees will
depend on the size of the host tree.

iv Sowing medium of germination
The type of sowing medium can influence the
aeration and drainage capacity and both will
influence the survival of seedlings. Some
treatments about medium factors are
explained in following table. Sandy material
was the better medium for germination. This
factor is related to the aeration, drainage and
temperature.

Mostly the ratio of host to parasite is 1:1 followed
in the field. This ratio is critical for survival and
productivity of sandalwood trees as well as the host
plants. Equal host to parasite ratio (1 : 1) heavily
leaning towards parasite leads to heavy parasitic
load, and hence may cause death or decline of the
host population, decreasing the ratio further.
Therefore, host and sandalwood ratio of 2 : 1 and 3 : 1
Table: Influence of type of sowing
medium on seed germination rate
Germination rate (%)
30.67
81.33
77.33
70.66
I. (Surata 1993)
v Sunlight Intensity
Sandalwood needs shade in the nursery. High
intensity of light can kill the seedling. Surata
(1993) reported that shading leads to higher
survival rate, except in the case of shading
with Acacia villosa.

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
39.54
vi Pests and diseases
The common diseases in nurseries are londoh
(a whitish decay fungi), damping off and wilt.
The most common pests are defoliators, leaf
worm, weevil, grass hoppers, bag worm, sap
suckers, coccids and lac insect which can
quickly kill a large number of seedlings.

iii Lack of water
The moisture content of seedling media is an
important factor in sandalwood nurseries.
High humidity will decrease the aeration
which is unsuitable for sandalwood seedling
growth. Therefore, regulation of moisture
content plays an important role in producing
high quality seedlings.

medium
Soil
Sand
Sawdust
Faecal of cow
Height (cm) Diameter Survival
(cm)
rate (%)
43.12
0.61
56.00
152
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Conclusion:
Sandalwood cultivation is a promising venture and with liberalization from governments, commercial
production is spreading across the agrarian landscape, however, the production potential is yet unknown and
uncertain. Presently, sandalwood is found to survive with a vast array of plants, especially short-rotation
species like casuarina and in some instances even with fruit trees like citrus, amla, mango, papaya, pomegranate
and other economical horticultural and forestry species.
As a parasite sandalwood inhibits the associated host, but the economical equilibrium between host and
sandalwood is not yet ascertained. Perennial trees of long rotational period of 25-30 years would appear
beneficial, but there are no long-term studies to confirm this. We need thorough in-depth knowledge for
commercial success. Much of the available information particularly on hosts is from pot-culture studies, and
upscaling of these results to the field level is rather difficult to comprehend with regard to economical rotation
age, selection of hosts, spacing and host-to-parasite ratio. Cultivation practices in farmer fields and natural
habitats needs to be standardized with good hosts. However, it is suggested to have multiple hosts of commercial
importance comprising both perennial leguminous and non-leguminous tree species.

References
Anon. 2014. Tropical Forestry Services Ltd Sandalwood Project 2014. Product disclosure statement. Indian
sandalwood. Nedlands (Australia): Tropical Forest Services.
Butar T., Sri Rahardjo, S.A and Widnyana, I. 2007. Sandalwood nursery problems and remedial measures in West
Timor.
Coakley T. 2013. Sandalwood markets and threats. In: Nageswara-Rao M, Soneji JR, Harbaugh-Reynaud DT,
editors. International Sandalwood Foundation. Proceedings of the International Sandalwood Symposium;
Oct 21-24; Honolulu, Hawaii. Raleigh (NC): Lulu Press; p. 71-81.
Jain, S.H., Angandi, V.G., Shankaranarayana, K.H., Ravikumar, G. 2003. Relationship between girth and
percentage of oil in sandal provenances. Sandalwood Research Newsletter. 18:4-5.
Jeeva, V., Saravanan, S., Devaraj, P. and Lakshmi devi, R. 1998. Malady and remedy of sandal cultivation in
farmlands and private lands-an overview. In aciar proceedings Australian Centre for International Agricultural
Research.6- 18.
Nagaveni, H.C. and Vijayalakshmi, G. 2003.Growth performance of sandal (Santalum album L.) with different
host species. Sandalwood Research Newsletter. 18: 1- 4.
Padmanabha HSA. 2013a. Indian sandalwood market trend. In: Nageswara-Rao M, Soneji JR, HarbaughReynaud DT, editors. International Sandalwood Foundation. Proceedings of the International Sandalwood
Symposium; Oct 21–24; Honolulu, Hawaii. Raleigh (NC): Lulu Press; p. 82–92.
Shailja Choudhary, Gitika Chaudhary. 2021. Sandal wood (Santalum album): ancient tree with significant
medicinal benefits. International Journal of Ayurveda and Pharma Research. 9(4):90-99.
Shinde, S. R. Ghatge, R. D. and Mehetre, S. S. 1999. Growth and development of sandal wood and its host
(Casuarina) with teak in mixed plantation. Indian Journal of Forestry. 22(3): 253-256.
Subasinghe, S.M.C.U.P. 2013. Sandalwood research: a global perspective. Journal of Tropical Forestry and
Environment. 3: (1).

153
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Problems and Prospects for Cultivation of
Santalum album L.
Sachin Verma1, Vimal Chauhan2, *, Uday Kumar3,
Krishan Chand4 ,
Ph.D Scholar1&3, Prof. and Head2, Scientist4 (Agroforestry)
College of Forestry Dr. Y S Parmar University of Horticulture
and Forestry, Nauni, Solan, Himachal Pradesh.
*Email: chauhanvimal64@gmail.com
S
andalwood is losing ground in India, owing to
various factors include smuggling of
sandalwood, policy paralysis in respect of
promoting sandalwood cultivation, forest fire, biotic
pressure on forests, prevalence of sandalwood spike
disease, etc. Although there are many problems
associated with the cultivation of sandalwood in India,
in this paper an attempt is made to discuss some of the
problems related to establishment of sandalwood
plantation in forest area and private plantations.

months and then gradually diminish. Fresh seeds
exhibit dormancy for 2 months. Pathogen infection,
rabbit and rodent menace, grazing by animals, high
atmospheric temperature and excessive moisture
content are the major factors which considerably
reduce the survival of seedlings. Sandalwood
seedlings are prone to attack from insect pests and
diseases, which take a heavy toll and sometimes wipe
off the whole stock.

Problems faced during sandal wood growth
1. Lack of regeneration
Poor regeneration can be attributed to several
factors, both natural and anthropogenic. Hurdles to
natural regeneration of sandalwood in forests include
recurrent annual fires in natural sandalwood areas,
lopping of trees for fodder, excessive grazing, hacking,
encroachments and spread of sandalwood spike
disease. While these factors hinder regeneration in
forest areas and diminish the growing stock, the
situation is accelerated by human activities of chronic
overexploitation and illicit felling.

Damping off, vascular wilt, web blight, stem
infection and seedling blight caused by Fusarium
oxysporum, Phytophthora, Pythium and Rhizoctonia are
the most serious diseases that cause severe damage
and economic loss in nurseries (Remadevi et al.,
2005). Among these F. oxysporum is the most serious
pathogen which affects seedlings in nurseries as well
as in natural forests. Seedling mortality caused by F.
oxysporum affects sandalwood at various stages
causing pre-emergence damping off, collar rot, stem
and root infection.

2. Low seed setting in seed stands
Sandalwood is predominantly an out breeding
species. The seeds are produced twice a year and are
capable of self-regeneration. Seeds from various seed
sources exhibit significant variation morphologically
and physiologically. Presence of genotypic barriers for
embryo development has resulted in lower percentage
of mature fruits in spite of good percentage of fruit
initiation (Sindhuveer endra et al., 1999). The tendency
for out breeding in sandalwood is reinforced by
asynchronous flowering, insect pollination, heterostyly
and self-incompatibility. Alternatively, S. album
regenerates asexually by means of root suckers. Root
suckers generally originate as shoot primordia from
injured or severed roots and are confined to an area
around the mother tree. Studies have shown that natural
stands of sandalwood in Sri Lanka have spread clonally
by prolific root suckering (Tennakoon et al., 2000).

4. Shade requirement
In the early stages of seedling development,
sandalwood derives nutrition from the relatively
large seed reserves and later, the formation of host
attachment through root connection becomes critical
for seedling survival and growth (Barrett and Fox,
1997). The duration of dependency on the kernel as
the food source needs to be studied. Sandalwood is a
sciophile in the seedling stage, becomes more
heliophilic once established. Full Sun light is
detrimental to the survival of sandalwood
germinants and they need to be grown in
greenhouse, shade house or in a shady area.
Therefore, the level of shade is important for seedling
growth. Early growth of sandalwood after seed
germination was found to be better in the shades of
bushes and clumps of vegetation (Rao, 1942) have
shown that some shade is beneficial for the first three
year, however, the length of time for optimum
benefit has not yet been elucidated.

3. Low seed germination and seedling mortality
Seeds are obtained by removing the fleshy portion
of the fruit. Seeds vary in their size and shape. Under
normal conditions they retain their viability up to six
155
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
5. Host plant requirement
as host species, were studied to identify the most
suitable host. Survival, height, collar diameter,
crown size and clear bole of S. album trees were
greater when grown with C. aurantium than the
other two hosts. Heartwood formation in S. album
was initiated in trees >9 cm diameter at breast height
(DBH), irrespective of host species. Relatively greater
value of DBH: height ratio of S. album in the case of P.
granatum indicates suitability of this species as a long
term host.

Sandalwood, being a hemi-root parasitic tree, root
connection with a host species is required for
nutrition to young plants as well as to the adult trees.
Additionally, host plants can also provide shade
required for the healthy growth of seedlings. Sandal
wood benefits from a primary host at the nursery
stage and from a secondary host (long term) in the
field (Fox, 2000). Early nursery growth was found to
be more rapid and secure when grown with a pot
host which functions both in plant nutrition and
water relations of sandalwood and reduces out
planting stress when transferred to the field (Fox,
2000). Poor growth without a primary host even after
application of supplementary nutrition has revealed
that a pot host is important for healthy and robust
development of sandalwood. Successful
establishment of sandal wood seedlings in
plantations requires the appropriate utilization of
host and this aspect has contributed to low
regeneration, both naturally and artificially.

Assuming about 250 trees are growing well, they
can put on an annual increment of 1 kg per year per
tree, thus giving an overall increment of 250 kg of
heartwood per year. The returns can be increased by
adopting intensive practices
Suggestions
 The tissue cultured plant cultivation will benefit
6. Slow growth of sandalwood
Though sandalwood is considered to be a slowgrowing tree under forest conditions (1 cm
girth/year), it can grow at a rate of 5 cm of girth or
more per year under favorable soil and moisture
conditions. The heartwood formation in sandalwood
starts around 10-13 years of age. So far the growth
data is available only in respect to natural forests,
mainly from Javadis in Tamil Nadu and the
Dharwad area of Karnataka.

farmers as sandalwood is the most economically
rewarding crop in the world. Better protection
and improved regeneration will result in
increased number of healthy plantations and
ultimately, will increase the income of the farmers.
 Government should give priority for the research,
development and extension to promote
sandalwood.

Singh et al., (2018) studied the growth and
heartwood contents of S. album trees aged 6 years
cultivated on farm land in association with Citrus
aurantium, Punica granatum and Casuarina equisetifolia
Literature Cited
Barrett DR and Fox J ED. 1997. Santalum album: Kernel composition, morphological and nutrient characteristics of
preparasitic seedlings under various nutrient regimes. Annals of Botany. 79: 59-66
Fox JED. 2000. Sandalwood : The royal tree. The Biologist. 47: 31-34
Rao LN. 1942. Studies in the Santalaceae. Annals of Botany. 6: 151-175
Singh B, Singh G, Rathore T S. 2018. The Effects of Woody Hosts on Santalum album L. Tree Growth Under
Agroforestry In Semi-Arid North Gujarat, India. Indian Forester.144: 5
Sindhuveerendra HC, Ramalakshmi R and Mallesha BB. 1999. Variation in seed characteristics in provenances of
sandal (Santalum album L.). Indian Forester. 125: 308-312
Tennakoon KU, Ekanayake SP and Etampawala ERLB. 2000. An overview of Santalum album research in Sri
Lanka. Sandalwood Research Newsletter. 11: 14
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
156
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Growing Sandalwood on the Wasteland of
Madhya Pradesh: Predicaments and
Potential Solutions
Priyanka Mishra1,* and Swati Sharma2,
1,2
R & D-Agriculture, Dharampal Satyapal Ltd.,
(Agro division), DS group Headquarters, Noida, U.P.
Email: swati.sharma@dsgroup.com or
*priyanka.mishra@dsgroup.com
M
adhya Pradesh (MP) is the second largest
State in India covering 9.38% of total
geographical area of the country. The
annual rainfall ranges 800 mm to 1,800 mm and the
annual temperature varies from 22°C to 25°C with
the maximum temperature reaching up to 49° C. The
State is drained by a number of rivers, which include
Narmada, Tapti, Son, Betwa, Shipra and Chambal.
As per the land use pattern report of Ministry of
Agriculture, Government of India (2014-15), the
total geographical area of Madhya Pradesh is 30,825
thousand hectare. Out of this total area, the
culturable wasteland is 1,010 thousand hectare
covering approximately 3.29 % of the total
geographical area. Now, this wasteland can further
be utilized for cultivation of some economically
important forest trees and other crops.

Role of private sectors
There is a growing demand for sandalwood based
products. On the other hand there is severe shortage
of supply of sandalwood raw material. It has
compelled the State Governments to bring changes in
rules related to cultivation of Sandalwood. This has
encouraged the Corporates to raise Sandalwood
plantations. It is estimated that there has been new
plantation on as much as 15,000 acres in southern
states and parts of western and northern India, in
recent years. Companies such as Surya Vinayak
Industries and Namdhari Seeds Ltd and a host of
individual farmers with large land holdings have
taken up commercial plantation of sandalwood in
the states of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra.

Nearly one-third area of the State is covered with
forests. Sandalwood is not a naturally occurring
associate of these forests. However, it has
ecologically adapted as an associate in natural dry
deciduous teak forest. Because of its high economic
value, sandalwood is being given considerable
attention by the State Forest Department.

Although Sandalwood can be grown on
wastelands of MP, raising sandalwood plantations in
such lands is a big challenge owing to the following
reasons.

The earliest recorded sandalwood introduction to
the natural forests of Madhya Pradesh dates back to
1880. Since then it has spread to an area of about 2360
ha. The first planting was done in an area of 175 ha
during 1979 in Seoni District. Subsequently,
substantial plantings were made in revenue lands in
Dewas, Indore, and Rajgarh Districts on the Malwa
plateau.

1 Identification of Ground water source/Aquifer
In Madhya Pradesh, mostly the wasteland is Stony
and rocky, where water availability is the major
concern. Except the rainy season which is of 3
months, the whole plantation for their water
requirement depends on the ground water.
Therefore, identification of aquifer or ground water
source is required. This process is cost intensive and
more of hit and trial method.
2 Pest and Disease spread at Specific area
repeatedly every year
Fig: a) Sandalwood plant b) Sandalwood based agroforestry
with aonla as host at some private farm in MP
157
Recurrence of certain diseases like spike disease
and insect-pests like scales and mealy bug at some
specific area repeatedly every year.

Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
3 Identification of Waterlogging and water stress
plants
Suggestions to Promote Sandalwood Farming in
Wasteland/Non Traditional Areas:
1 Wasteland under possession of government
should be given to corporates or private
players to initiate sandalwood plantation. The
period for lease should be 50 years so that at
least two harvests can be taken. Multiplication
of germplasm to be reinforced through tissue
culture and raising seedlings from seeds
collected from plus trees of sandalwood.
2 Saplings should be made available to farmers
at free of cost by agencies like IWST, State
Forest Departments and State Agricultural
Universities.
3 Sandalwood based agro forestry
demonstration plots with horticulture species
as secondary host along with short term
primary host & annual intercrops for
demonstration to farmers and in this way, a
farmer will also be ensured with sustainable
income to meet out his plantation expense.
4 Nationalized banks should come forward
with finance schemes in agro forestry for
growers.
5 Legal restrictions should be lifted for
sandalwood’s harvesting, transport and
marketting as it is grown by the farmers.

The wastelands generally have undulated land
area, which creates hurdle in even distribution of
irrigation water and ultimately results in improper
drainage.
4 Bark Cracking problem in Young and old
plantation
Bark cracking is a major issue in such plantations.
Through literatures, it has been found sun scalding is
the main concern for the cause.
5 Plant Nutrient Management System
There are no standard packages of practices for
cultivation of Sandalwood and hence it is difficult for
the farmers to follow right nutrient management
regime to raise healthy plantations.
6 Protection of Sandalwood trees from theft
Sandalwood is highly prone to theft and hence
protection of sandalwood trees poses big challenge
for the growers.
To combat such challenges the public and private
organizations should come together and work in the
direction to find out the ways of promoting
sandalwood cultivation in remote/wasteland areas.

Conclusion
There has been increased interest among farmers and corporates in growing sandalwood in farmlands and
private lands. However, lack of adequate knowledge on sandalwood cultivation and forest legislations hampers
the extension of sandalwood cultivation in non-traditional areas. Hence, State agencies have to play proactive
role in promoting Sandalwood cultivation in non-traditional areas by liberalizing the existing legal provisions
and by providing incentives to the sandalwood growers.

(A-B) Sandalwood idols of Lord Krishna and Radha with
decorative frames found in the Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad.
158
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Fresh Scents of the Ancient Aroma
Introduction
T
he East Indian
Sandalwood is one of the
most revered gifts of
ancient India to the world. It has
been an integral part of Indian
culture for ages. The sandalwood
tree is grown for its heartwood
which contains the exquisite oil.
Steam distillation of the heartwood
obtained from the stem and root
portions of Santalum album yields a
mixture of around 70 constituents
which are mostly sesquiterpenoids,
and the most prominent among
them are the α- and β- santalols.
These santalols and many of their
oxidised derivatives have been
isolated, and proved to have
various medicinal properties and
impart fragrant odour. Though the
other sandalwoods (other species
of the Santalum genus) can produce
comparable levels of these
compounds, the oils derived from
them are commercially less
valuable. However, natural
supplies of S. album are now
virtually non-existing mostly due
to illegal felling, and only the trees
grown in plantations have salvaged
the species from becoming extinct.
However, its cultivation is
hindered by many factors. Apart
from the silvicultural intricacies,
Tresa Hamalton,
Silviculture and Forest Management,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, P.O. Malleswarm, Bengaluru.
Email:tresa@icfre.org
the health and security of the tree are the most concerning. Slow growth
rates and variation in sandalwood oil content also hamper sandalwood
production. Moreover, the production of the essential oil yielding
heartwood in the tree is governed by many unproved factors. All this
had led researchers to attempt developing technologies for artificial
synthesis of the compounds in the sandalwood essential oil. The efforts
to chemically synthesize α- and β- santalols began in 1970s, but the
feasibility of chemical synthesis was reported only in the 21st century
owing to the structural complexity of these molecules. Nevertheless,
devising an industrial mechanism for large-scale production did not
seem to be cost-effective, and the quest for alternative approaches still
continued.

Constituents of sandalwood oil
The actual composition of the S. album essential oil is highly complex.
Comprehensive analysis of the oil by Brunke (Dragoco) in 1995 showed
that (–)-(Z)-β-Santalol is largely responsible for
the highly appreciated creamy, lactonic,
sandalwood odour of the oil.
Greater than 90% of the sandalwood
oil is composed of α-santalol and βsantalol. The remaining constituents
are hydrocarbons (α-santalene, βsantalene and epi-β-santalene),
aldehydes (tricycloekasantalal, exonorbicycloekasantalal and teresantalal),
ketones, phenols, acids (teresantalic acid), and
heterocyclic compounds. Though they are collectively responsible for
the characteristic odour of the oil, the exact quantity of each of these
compounds is not the same in oils extracted from different trees. Many
factors have been attributed to this difference in composition of
sandalwood oil including geographical origin, climatic variation and
the extraction method employed.

Chemical synthesis
A wide variety of novel and fascinating odorant structures which are
part of essential oils have been isolated from natural sources. (–)-(Z)-βSantalol enantiomer is the gold standard solely responsible for the
esteemed odour and highly reminiscent of the sandalwood essential oil.

159
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Whereas processing and obtaining essential oils is
often time consuming, energy and labour intensive,
and often requiring solvent extraction, they upsurge
the prices of essential oils and their synthetic versions
offer sustainable supply at constant quality and
reasonable price.

sandalwood odour or structures similar to santalol.

Alternative biological synthesis
Since a method for chemical synthesis of all the
sandalwood sesquiterpene constituents is not yet
available, the search was still on for an alternative to
The widespread shortage of mature sandalwood
the naturally extracted sandalwood oil through a
trees and an ever-increasing rise in the price of
more energy and resource efficient process. Research
natural sandalwood oils led researchers to explore
was hence focussed on producing biologically
for their synthetic substitutes. Devising a
derived synthetic versions of the
synthetic route to the principal
sandalwood oil constituents. Plant cell
constituents in sandalwood oil has
and tissue culture techniques, which
Advances in
challenged chemists for about half a
employed for the synthesis and
genetic, metabolic and are
century, as the molecule’s right
extraction of a variety of plant
isomer and enantiomer with a
protein engineering make extractives, were thus explored.
specific orientation of the sidechain
Crovadore’s team of researchers
use of enzymes to
was required. The structure of αattempted to produce
santalol was precisely identified by
synthesise required
sesquiterpenes of the sandalwood
Semmler in 1921, and Ruzicka
essential
oil from S. album calli, and
chemicals.
elucidated the exact gross structure of
their method for in vitro production of
β-santalol, at the end of 1935. In 1967, αβ-santalene was patented in 2010. At the
santalol structure was confirmed by Erman,
end of 2012, Misra and Dey reported the
while that of β-santalol was confirmed only in 1970
presence of santalols in the extracellular medium
by Erman and Kretschmar. From then, considerable
when somatic embryos of S. album were cultured in
efforts were made to synthetically develop the
air-lift bioreactors. However, sandalwood oil
natural fragrance compounds of sandalwood oil and
production using in vitro cultures is still in its infancy
semi-synthetic approaches were also tried, mostly
and has not progressed further, since production of
for α-santalol and β-santalol. But it was not until
individual compounds has only been achieved so far.
2004, that Dupau demonstrated the four-step
Advances in genetic, metabolic and protein
sequence from an aldehyde to the installation of the
engineering
make use of enzymes to synthesise
key (Z)-allylic alcohol as catalytic, industrially
required chemicals. Metabolic engineering of living
feasible and efficient.
microorganisms to produce specific sandalwood oil
Though the chemical synthesis of the santalols was
compounds using regio- and stereo-specific enzymes
successfully achieved, the manufacture of the
offers a sustainable and environmentally friendly
synthetic santalols did not become a practical
alternative. The genes coding for the enzymes of a
possibility, since the mechanism involved many
metabolic pathway leading to the production of one
steps and required the use of difficult-to-handle
of the constituents are transferred to another singlereagents in the industrial-scale, and the overall yields
celled organism, whose growth and expression of the
were also generally low. Consequently, research was
inserted genes can be controlled using fermentation
then directed towards obtaining synthetic substitute
technology. Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces
compounds possessing the fragrance of sandalwood
cerevisiae are easy to engineer heterologous hosts
by economically and commercially feasible
using which the production of santalols and
processes using easily available and low-cost starting
santalenes has been shown to be possible. Largematerial. Some important synthetic sandalwood
scale industrial production has also been achieved,
aroma chemicals were thus synthesised viz.,
and these biologically produced synthetic versions
Sandranol, Sandalore, Sandela, Santalydol, Osyrol,
have been traded as syn-bio sandalwood oil, like
Polysantol, Brahmanol, Decahydro β-Naphthyl
Isobionics® Santalol.
Formate, and various condensates possessing
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
160
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Conclusion
As early as 1984, Shankaranarayana and Parthasarathi of the then Sandalwood Research Centre, Bangalore
rightly stated that, “while a host of considerations led to the development of a multitude of synthetic
sandalwood aroma chemicals, none of them is a match to the natural East Indian Sandalwood oil in its sweet,
fragrant, persistent and woody odour, or possesses its many medicinal properties”. On the contrary, oils
produced through alternative biological methods may be labelled “natural”, but they are not sourced from the
traditionally and biologically natural producer, and most importantly do not contain all the components of the
traditional sandalwood oil.
The existing methods of natural sandalwood oil production are not without problems, but it should not imply
that synthetic techniques are the only remedy. Though the santalols are individually key molecules that typically
recall the odour of the essential oil, the odour of the sandalwood oil is infinitely more rich and complex than those
pure odiferous principal compounds. Same holds good for the synergetic medicinal effects rendered by the
absolute sandalwood oil, which may not be realised with its individual constituents. Future attempts can focus
on carrying forward the preliminary efforts on extracting sandalwood oil constituents from in vitro cultures of
the natural source i.e., Santalum album. But developing such a technology also has a long way to go, because the
mechanism to elicit constitutive in vitro production of all the constituents must first be invented, which is nearly
impossible. Right now, we are bound to be satisfied with the fresh scents of chemical or biological synthetic
versions, at least until the sandalwood tree regains its past glory with increased populations that remain
protected. And then, the ancient aroma will drift afresh.

Common Facility Centre at IWST
Common Facility Centre (CFC) has been established inside IWST campus during the year 2016. The CFC houses many modern wood working and
bamboo processing machines. CFC extends wood and bamboo processing facilities to various stake holders,
self‐help groups, NGOs, wood based small scale/cottage industries and local artisans. All the machines can be used on payment basis during all working
days (Monday to Friday) from 9:00 AM to 5:30 PM. The details of available wood working and bamboo machines and their description are given below.

A. List of Wood and Bamboo Working Machines
No.
1
2
3
Name of Machinery
Surface Planer
Thickness Planer
Sliding Table Panel Saw
4
5
Small Table Circular Saw
Multi Spindle boring
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Spindle Molder
Belt Sander
Finger Jointing Machine
Seasoning Kiln
Bamboo Cross Cutting
Bamboo Semi Half Splitting
Bamboo Variable Size splitting
Bamboo External Knot Removing
Bamboo Thickness Planning
Bamboo Slat Gluing
Bamboo Panel Drier
Description
Suitable for removing rough surface of the wood by planing.
Suitable for sizing the piece of wood in two dimensions
Suitable to cut a wood lumber/panel board to the required sizes in
different cutting like rip cut, & scoring for pre lamboard.
Suitable for rip cutting, cross cutting, and chamfering of wood.
Suitable for multi boring on wood/panel boards like vertical, horizontal
and angular bores.
Suitable for edge profiling and contouring.
Suitable for sanding the surface
Suitable for joining small solid wood pieces
Suitable for seasoning the wood(Capacity: 200 cft)
Suitable for cross cutting of Bamboo culms.
Suitable for splitting the bamboo culms to rectangular strips.
Suitable for splitting the bamboo culms to number of strips.
Suitable for removing external knots of bamboo culms.
Suitable for thickness planning of bamboo strips to variable size.
Suitable for gluing the bamboo strips for making panel of different sizes.
Suitable for drying glues bamboo panels.

To use the facility and for further details, please contact:
Officer incharge of Common Facility Centre, Institute of Wood Science and Technology
18th Cross, Malleshwaram, Bangalore Ph:080 22190178, E Mail: cfc_iwst@icfre.org
161
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
A Variant Maneuvers from Aromatic Wood –
A Rich Heritage of Vitality Continues
R. Athulya*, R. Sundararaj and J.Nandini,
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, P.O. Malleswaram, Bengaluru.
*Email: athulya@icfre.org
Introduction
S
andalwood is a valuable
aromatic wood produced
from trees of genus
Santalum. Its importance is
mentioned in Sanskrit and Chinese
manuscripts. It is considered as
sacred and symbol of vitality.
Sandalwood is often cited as one of
the most expensive woods in the
world. In India, it is largely
distributed in Southern India
especially in Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamilnadu. The species is
recognized due to its fragrance and
significant social and economic
values. It is apppellated by several
vernacular names such as Chandan
in Sanskrit and Hindi, Chandanam
in Tamil and Malayalam, Gandham
in Telugu and Shrigandha in
Kannada. The nation has a rich
heritage with the Scented tree being
prominent in many areas but
unfortunately, the production of
Sandalwood has decreased because
of decimated sandalwood
numbers, while the demand
continues to increase.

The Scent Finds its Way in
Following Stretches
1. Sandalwood
Rituals
in Religious
In hinduism, it is believed that
goddess Lakshmi lives in
Sandalwood tree. The essence of
the wood spreads positive energies
across the place. It is used to
worship most of the holy deities
preferably god Shiva. The fine paste of Sandalwood powder is intrinsic
to rituals and ceremonies as a custom. It is applied on foreheads as a
“Prasada” a gracious gift of god after religious tonsure.
(Harishankar et al., 2014). In buddhism, it is considered as padma (lotus)
and offered to Amitabha Buddha. It is the most popular scent used in
incense while offering to guru.
Similarly, It is used to worship Jain deities Thirthankaras. During Jain
cremation ceremonies, sandalwood garlands are used. On the occasion
of Mahamasthakabhisheka, the statue of Gommateshwara is showered
with holy elements and sandalwood is one among of it. As a part of
sufism tradition, sandalwood paste is applied on graves to symbolize
devotion and respect. This culture is practiced among Tamilians also.

2. Sandalwood in medicine
For centuries, Sandalwood is been included in Ayurveda, Chinese
and Tibetan traditional medicines. In Ayurveda the sandalwood oil is
treated as a cooling, exhilarating, antipyretic, expectorant and
stimulant. It is also used as astringent to the bowels and as an
aphrodisiac. In Siddha medicine, sandalwood paste with lime juice is
recommended to treat itching, scabies, eczema and other skin problems.
During leucorrhea sandalwood paste is consumed with milk as a
remedy. In Unani, sandalwood is applied on forehead during fever in
order to dissipate the effect of heat and provides coolness to the body. In
India specially in south, people do apply “gandha” on their body and on
their foreheads during fever, as it is anti-pyretic and lowers the “ushna”
(body heat) and offers cooling effect. It is also applied to inflamed sites of
body or on boils and effective in curing skin diseases. For genito-urinary
problems sandalwood decoction is recommended and for migraines
sandalwood paste is applied on nostrils for relief.
Sandalwood scent is mainly known for the benefits of aromatherapy.
It promotes mental and physical health by lowering the spasm and
contraction of muscles and blood vessels and stimulates sleep with
goodness of Santalol, which is an active compound. Along with the anti
–inflammatory property, Sandalwood oil is also a good antimicrobial
agent. It is broadly active against many drug resistant microbes like
Staphylococcus (including antibiotic-resistant strains MRSA and VRSA),
Streptococcus, and some vancomycin resistant gram-negative bacteria
(Morris et al., 1979). Through natural means sandalwood paves a way to
163
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
treat drug resistant diseases.

Sandalwood holds sweet and solid long lasting
cologne. Most Indian attars use sandalwood oil as
the base because of its inherent capacity to absorb
ethereal notes of other whole herbs or flowers and
enhance their perfumery status and stability. The
goodness of its fixative property is used to make top
–class perfumes and essential perfume oil which
revivifies mental calmness.

Sandalwood is significant in treating dandruff and
dermatophytes. In the journal Nature
Communications, it is noted that aromatic oil
stimulates release of ‘hair growth factors” which
includes vitamins and hormones essential for
promoting hair cell follicles multiplication.
Sandalore is thought to promote hair growth by
acting on the smell receptor OR2AT4, which is
present in hair follicles. (Deccan chronicle 2018). In
Thirupathi, devotees who offer their hairs to god
‘keshamundana’, will apply sandalwood paste on
their bald head. This is a traditional practice tagged
with medicinal value.

4. Sandalwood in microscopy
It is used as immersion oil with Ultraviolet and
Fluorescence microscopy due to its optimal
refractive index and less fluorescence property.
Immersion oils for UV wavelength range must have
extremely low or no fluorescence, serving non
hazyto the field and making images distinct.
Fluorescence material contradicts this property.
Sandalwood oil is classified as “non-fluorescent,”
hence they are signified in this area (Bannerjee et
al.,1981).

3. Sandal in beauty aids
Sandalwood provides multiple advantages to
skin. Traditionally it’s been in practice with regular
face packs and ailments. Its active key ingredient is
alpha–Santalol, which is an inhibitor of tyrosinase, a
key enzyme in synthesis of the skin pigment melanin.
So it contributes in skin lightening effects.
Sandalwood helps in reducing scars, wrinkles,
inflammation, psoriasis, acne, eczema and other skin
aided benefits. Sandalwood oil nourishes the skin
and improves the elasticity of skin and even out skin
tone. It also contains antioxidants which prevents
free radical formation in skin and helps to maintain
buoyancy of skin cells. In India, most home remedies
prepared by grandmothers included sandalwood as
special element for skin treatment. Sandalwood oil is
very popular and widely used. It is often added to
soaps and lotions. Sandalwood soap in tropical
countries like India is useful as it potentially reduces
sunburns. The smooth scented oil imparts hydrating,
anti-ageing, cleansing, de-toning and moisturizing
effect making it the perfect classic ingredient in most
beauty aids especially in soaps and creams. As a
tradition, at some places, it is included with regular
base oils like almond or jojoba oil for scalp. As hair oil
it stimulates hair growth and cools the scalp,
eliminates dandruff and contributes a unique
fragrance to the hair and smoothens the hair texture.
It is also used as body massage oil. Hydrosols of
sandalwood is used to smoothen the face and as a
hair mist (Reema Patel, 2021).

http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
5. Sandalwood in food
On FDA approval recommended quantities of
therapeutic graded essential oils are used to add
flavor and fragrance to many foods and soft drinks.
Sandalwood oil is used by many food industries in
India as a flavor enhancer. It is used in chewing gum
and bubble gum to enhance the taste. It is also used to
give intense flavors to products like candies, frosting,
butter cream fillings. (Das, 2016 ).The sandalwood oil
is also used as an additional factor in baking aided
with moisture retaining capacity with addition of
good texture to baked products like cakes, cookies,
puddings etc.
The strong sweet and long lasting odor makes
sandalwood oil as a preferable ingredient in
beverage industry. It is added to vodkas and liquors
like brandy as a primary or supplemental flavor. Due
to high amount of α-santalol in sandalwood oil it is
blended with chocolates under recommended
amount in order to reduce anxiety and to provide
fine and new taste. (Hongratanaworakit et al.,2004).
It is also used in non-alcoholic beverages like fruit
and vegetable juices. Flavored creams are prepared
with addition of few drops of sandalwood oil to keep
the drink fresh and delicious. They are used in tonic
164
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood as furniture
preparations too. Sandalwood oil is added to mineral
water to enhance the flavor and also for its
therapeutic value.

Due to its hard characteristic, sandalwood
exhibits good furnishing property. They are
moisture proof and offer compact structure. In the
process of using sandalwood furniture, its abrasion
resistance is better than other solid wood furniture,
so the service life of sandalwood furniture is very
long. It possess beautiful oily texture with more
decorative effects. With the above mentioned
properties, sandalwood is used in many decors like
idols, doors, beds, tables and other furnishing items.
Due to heavy logging in the past few years, the wood
of sandalwood has become increasingly scarce, so
authentic sandalwood furniture on the market is
particularly expensive.

Sandalwood oil is used in extending shelf life of
food products like meats, fish, cheese, fowl, fruits
and vegetables because of their antimicrobial
property. They render natural preservative
advantage and also mask unpleasant tastes or smells
in food products. They also possess good antioxidant
property. Sandalwood oil is also used as a flavor
stabilizer. Sandalwood produces an edible nut which
tastes like almond.

6. Sandalwood as disinfectant and as air
refresher
In India, white sandalwood is majorly used to
showcase rich heritage and as a symbol of high
respect. Sandalwood garlands made up of
sandalwood chips or remnant bark pieces are
noteworthy. Among government bound places, the
spectacular furniture and decors are displayed. The
exquisitely carved sandalwood door leading to the
cabinet room of the imposing building at Vidhana
Soudha in Bengaluru is magnificent. The carved
images of gods and mythological figures have a huge
demand in the market.

Sandalwood possess a strong endurant smell.
Because of this noteworthy feature. It is used in
camphors and dhoop in order to spread the
smoothening scented fumes around. In ancient
practices it was used in order to avoid cockroaches
and other infectious agents. This practice has been
followed with advanced technology and
formulations, resulting as good disinfectant, killing a
broad range of bacteria and fungi. Hydrosol or floral
water extracted via steam distillation from
sandalwood is a pleasant way to refresh small rooms.

Conclusion
India was once a world leader in sandalwood production. However, over the year smuggling became rampant
due to the wood’s high value and demand in the market. Thefts gradually decimated the sandalwood forests.
Royal tree status-a tag indicating the exclusive proprietorship of Government, not only hampered Sandalwood
tree cultivation, but also indirectly resulted in over exploitation. It has got immense uses in various industries.
Some of the potential uses of sandalwood are untapped. Lack of quality sandalwood is still a major constraint for
this. Consistent efforts in terms of scientific research are needed for product diversification and value addition.

References
Banerjee A.and Mukherjee A. K. (1981). Chemical aspects of santalin as a histological stain.
Biotechnic&Histochemistry, 56(2), 83–85
Harishankar L., Singh S. and Mishra P.K .(2014) Trees in Indian Mythology. Discovery, 12(29)
Das K.(2016) Essential Oils in Food Preservation, Flavor and Safety, Elsevier
Morris J.A., Khettry A. and Seitz E.W. (1979) Antimicrobial activity of aroma chemicals and
essential oils.Journal of the American Oil Chemists Society. 56(5):595–603
Reema Patel (2021). “What can Sandalwood do for your skin?”Healthline
165
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
76
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
SANDALWOOD - The fragrance of the world
(Sandalwood species around the world)
H.S. Ananthapadmanabha
Forestry Consultant, Bangalore.

S
andalwood tree belongs to the family
Santalaceae, the gnus “Santalum”grows
naturally throughout the Pacific and
EasternIndian Ocean regions. Sandalwood trees are
evergreen ranging in size from tall shrubs to large
trees. They grow n variety of climates ranging from
Australian desert to sub-tropical New Caledonia and
at elevations from sea level to 5000 meters. It is
distributed in peninsular India, parts of Malaysia,
Australia, New Zealand and Polynesia extending to
the Hawaiian Archipelago and Juan Fernandez
islands, The species belonging to this genus are
generally root parasitic plants, equipped with special
structures (haustoria) on its root that penetrates the
root of host plants to obtain nutrients.

distillation yields 4 to 6 percent oil. Its use is
perfumery and medicine. It is naturally found
India, Sri Lanka and Indonesia and introduced
different countries for its lucrative returns. It
highly adaptive to different tropical countries.

in
in
to
is
S.spicatum, (R.Br.) ADC, popularly known as
West Australian sandalwood, it is one of the
The genera contains sixteen recognized species
and more than 12 varieties, distributed throughout
the world. Out of them only sevenspecies, produce
commercially exploitable scented heartwood and oil
(S.album, S.yasi, S.spicatum, S. lanceolatum, S
austrocaledonicum, S.mecgregorii, and S.paniculatum).
These are important species for their fragrant scented
heartwood and for essential oil. Other species of
Santalum also produce fragrant wood and oil,
however their contribution to the essential oil
industry is limited.

important species producing scented heartwood and
oil. Sandalwood has been exported to different
countries since 1844. The oil has different chemical
composition and has better medicinal properties.
Compared to other sandalwood oil. The heartwood
is dark brown and the sapwood is white and
combatively less. The scented heartwood yields
about 2 to 2.5 percent oil. The essential oil is used in
perfumery, incense sticks, soaps and toiletries and
aromatherapy. Wood is used for carving.

All species occur in natural forest in different
habitats. Most of the species are over exploited and
are under threat as endangered species. The demand
for the scented heartwood and scented natural
sandalwood oil is on the increase and the supply is on
the decline. Because of inconsistent supply, the price
is fluctuating and has gone steeply depriving its use
in various industries. The only alternate left is to
produce sandalwood commercially with high input
and management technique to a short rotation crop.

S. laceolatum (R.Br)
is the second major
r e s o u r c e
o f
sandalwood to native
Australia. It is known
as “Plum Bush” native
to Queensland. The
sapwood is pale
yellow and the
heartwood is dark
brown. The scented heartwood on distillation yields
about 2 to 3 percent oil. Chemical composition of oil
is different compared to other Santalum species.

The genus represented by Santalum albumLinn.,
produce rich heartwood and oil. It is known as “East
Indian Sandalwood” and the distilled essential oil
from it as East Indian sandalwood oil”. East Indian
sandalwood oil is the queen of all sandalwood in the
world, in quality and fragrance. The heartwood upon
167
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
S.austrocaledonicum, The tree is native to New
Caledonia NC, and also found distributed in the
main island of Archipelago of New Caledonia and
Vanuatu of south Pacific. Plants are having greater
economic potential, the heartwood is slightly yellow
and good material for carving. Scented heartwood
yields about 4.5 percent oil on distillation. Essential
oil is similar to East Indian sandalwood but not
identical, it blends well with other essential oil.
Attempts are being made to hybridize with S. album.
The oil is highly priced and very much sought after in
the perfume industries.

collected from S.yasi trees in a mixed population with
S.album gave 20% hybrid seeds. Hybrid sandalwood
seedlings showed growth rate almost twice to that of
S.yasi. Scented heartwood on distillation have
yielded more than 7 % essential oil. Sandalwood oil is
almost equivalent to East Indian sandalwood oil in
both physical and chemical properties.
S.macgreigorii. F.V Mullar (PNG sandalwood).
The tree is endemic to southern Papua New Guinea.
Tree size varies from small to medium and grows to a
height 8 to 10 meters, often multi stemmed.
Morphologically the tree resembles to S.album. The
commercial value of sandalwood depends on its
heartwood content. Heartwood is slightly brown in
colour and yields 3 to 5 % essential oil. The quality of
oil is low due to lower santalol content. It blends well
with other essential oil.

Santalumyasi.It grows in Fiji, Tonga and Papua
New Guinea Island, Its scented heartwood and oil is
equivalent to East Indian sandalwood. It is capable of
growing in various types of soil. In Tonga its best
development is on soils derived from volcanic ash
overlaying coralline rock. It grows to a height of 15
meters with a maximum bole of 40 to 50cm at GBH.
Leaves are typically linear simple and opposite.
Scented heartwood upon distillation yields about 5
to 6 percent scented oil.

Hawaiian sandalwood (Santalumpaniculatum)
The tree is endemic to Hawaii Island. It occurs in in
dry wood land forest areas of Lava substrates or in
Cinder cones. The trees are grouped under green
colored species. The tree is called mountain
sandalwood. It is only found in big island.
Heartwood is brown in colour and yields about 2 to 3
% essential oil. Sandalwood has a god history behind
and is more culturally attached to different religions,
and the product derived from it have been in use for
several centuries.

Hybrid sandalwood is found only Fiji,
Tonga and Papua New Guinea islands.
Grafting
One year old root stock of S. album has been grafted
with mature Santalumyasi clones. Micro grafting
trials with scions of S.yasi trees grafting on S.album
germinant has been very successful. It seems the
growth performance of these hybrids are more than
two folds compared to S.album or S.yasi.

Other species of “Santalum” are only of academic
interest since their production and contribution to
the essential oil industry is limited, however they are
the important species of the region contributing to
the cultural heritage and use. There are more than 56
species and varieties of “Santalum” mentioned in the
literature, based on the morphological characters.

Hybrid plants
It has been reported that native Fijian species is
able to naturally hybridize with S.album. The seeds
168
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
Sandalwood Society of India
# 4/A, Resma, 80 feet Road, RMV IInd Stage, Bengaluru-560094
Sri. Kodandaram Ramaiah, Chairman
Dr. K.T. Chandrashekar, Executive Director
Email: ktchandrashekar2@gmail.com
Mob. 9945994777
S
andalwood Society of India (SSI) is a
registered body (vide registration no
SOR/GNR/139/2014-15) under Karnataka
Society’s Registration Act 1960. SSI is also registered
with Niti Aayog (no139/2014-15). It is a non-profit
organization actively involved promotion of
Sandalwood cultivation across the country having
headquarters in Bangalore and regional clusters in
Tamilnadu, Telangana, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Orissa, Rajasthan and Assam. The society was
formed with a mission to promote natural,
sustainable, and legal production of sandalwood and
its end products to meet global requirements by
involving farmers, entrepreneurs, scientists, and end
users.

Ayurveda, pharma preparations including high end
life style products.

Key Activities
SSI has taken up initiation to enlarge private
plantation to the tune of over 173,000 acres across the
country. In Karnataka 49000 acres of sandalwood has
been cultivated in their lands. The rate of annual
growth of plantation is more than 10%. Society is
equipped with senior scientists with more than 30
years of experience in sandalwood and other agro
forestry species, retired IFS officers, technocrats and
industrialists. The society’s knowledge bank is
tremendously helping farmers who regularly seek
help in all cultivation & preservation aspects.

The objective of the society is to meet the
aspirations of the farmers, entrepreneurs, and end
users, keeping in mind the global demand and
supply of sandalwood with the involvement of all
stakeholders. Further, focus has been given for the
promotion of sandalwood and its allied products to
achieve 10-15% of market share particularly in
perfume sector. The concept of production of natural
sandalwood from soil to oil by utilizing the lab to
land and ends up with value added products chain
viz. Toiletries, cosmetically, Neutraceuticals,
SSI has already delivered capacity building
training to more than 2000 forest officers and field
staff of Karnataka Forest Department on sandalwood
Seed Technology, Nursery Practices, Sandalwood
Planting designs, Plantation Technology, Pests and
diseases control, Insect management, Protection of
169
Vol 2. | Issue 2 | July-September 2021
sandalwood plantations, Value added products
developed from sandalwood seed oil, Legal issues of
different states, Trade and marketing of
Sandalwood. Society has tie ups with Krishi Vigyan
Kendras, University of Agricultural Sciences, Vana
Vigyan Kendras, IWST and Karnataka Forest
Department for establishing different agro forestry
models with sandalwood to help farmers
maximizing the benefits.

and supply of sandalwood & its products. This will
help farmers, end users to obtain insurance, and
banking assistance. SSI is willing to help state
governments in building forest infrastructure
involving Sandalwood, Melia Dubia, and other agro
forestry, horticulture and agricultural species as
consultants and training partners.
 Sandalwood society of India provides technical
input to nurseries to grow healthy saplings.

Society frequently conducts training programs for
farmers from different states. So far SSI has trained
more than 9000 farmers and numbers are growing.
SSI is on the verge of developing many products
from sandalwood seed oil for the first time in the
world. They are anti ageing creams, sandalwood
health drink which aims at reducing diabetic levels,
Sandalwood Seed husk as animal feed etc. This will
generate regular revenue both to farmers and
governments.

 The society also conducts onsite training
Programs.
 Sandalwood Society of India develop different
Agro forestry models.
 To provide a common platform for all
sandalwood growers & industries.
 It is non-profit organization with the focus on
Production utility, educational, research on
sandalwood.

SSI is capable of acting as coordinating body for
growers and end users to meet the emerging demand
http://iwst.icfre.gov.in
170
SPINDLELESS LOG PEELING MACHINE
(Available in 4-Feet and 8-Feet Size)
FEATURES:
 HIGH SPEED LONG LIFE
 EASY OPERATION
 SPECIALLY DESIGN FOR 19 INCH DIA LOGS
Model No.
SL-100s
 EASY PEELING SOFTWOOD & HARDWOOD
 THICKNESS TOLERANCE 0.075+/ EASY MAINTENANCE
 INBUILT DIGITAL & SERVO SYSTEM
 AUTO TILTING SYSTEM P/BAR & KNIFE
 DIGITAL CONTROL CUTTING SYSTEM
 MAXIMIZING YIELD
 HIGH PRODUCTIVITY
 ONE YEAR WARRANTY
Designer & Manufacturer Exporter of PLYWOOD VENEER MACHINERY:
GURU AMAR INDUSTRY LIMITED
E-30,31, Industrial Area, Yamuna Nagar-135001 (Haryana) India. Tel: 01732-257577, 257520
Mobile: 098120-25062, 098122-00053 E-mail: guruamarindia@gmail.com. Website: www.guruamar.com
Published by:
Institute of Wood Science and Technology, Bengaluru
Indian Council of Forestry Research & Education
(An Autonomous body under Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change)
P.O. Malleshwaram, Bengaluru - 560 003, Karnataka, India
E-mail: dir_iwst@icfre.org | Website: https://iwst.icfre.gov.in
For copies, write to:
Head, Extension Division,
Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bengaluru
P.O. Malleshwaram, Bengaluru - 560 003.
E-mail: extension_iwst@icfre.org
Designed by: Samvida Communications (OPC) Pvt. Ltd.
Contact: Meghana S Belavadi, meghana@samvida.biz, +91 9886201993
